## Aionian Bible
## File Name: Holy-Bible---English---Open-English-Bible-Commonwealth---Source-Edition.VPL.txt
## File Usage: Holy-Bible---English---Open-English-Bible-Commonwealth
## File Created: 12/12/2025 22:48:14
## File Purpose: Supporting resource for the Aionian Bible project
## File Location: https://resources.AionianBible.org
## Publisher Name: Nainoia Inc
## Publisher Contact: https://www.AionianBible.org/Publisher
## Publisher Mission: https://www.AionianBible.org/Preface
## Publisher Website: https://NAINOIA-INC.signedon.net
## Publisher Facebook: https://www.Facebook.com/AionianBible
## Source URL: https://ebible.org/details.php?id=engoebcw
## Source File: https://ebible.org/Scriptures/engoebcw_vpl.zip
## Source Date: 12/11/2025 01:55:42
## Source Copyright: Public Domain
## Source Text: unaltered below
##

RUT 1:1 In the time when the judges ruled, there was once a famine in the land. A man from Bethlehem in Judah took his wife and two sons to live in the territory of Moab.
RUT 1:2 His name was Elimelech and his wife’s was Naomi, and his two sons were Mahlon and Chilion. They were Ephrathites from Bethlehem in Judah. After they had been living in Moab for some time,
RUT 1:3 Elimelech died, and Naomi was left with her two sons,
RUT 1:4 who married Moabite women named Orpah and Ruth. After they had lived there about ten years,
RUT 1:5 Mahlon and Chilion both died, and Naomi was left alone, without husband or sons.
RUT 1:6 So she set out with her daughters-in-law to return from the land of Moab, for she had heard that the Lord had remembered his people and given them food.
RUT 1:7 As they were setting out together on the journey to Judah,
RUT 1:8 Naomi said to her daughters-in-law, ‘Go, return both of you to the home of your mother. May the Lord be kind to you as you have been kind to the dead and to me.
RUT 1:9 The Lord grant that each of you may find peace and happiness in the house of a new husband.’ Then she kissed them; but they began to weep aloud
RUT 1:10 and said to her, ‘No, we will return with you to your people.’
RUT 1:11 But Naomi said, ‘Go back, my daughters. Why should you go with me? Can I still bear sons who might become your husbands?
RUT 1:12 Go back, my daughters, go your own way, because I am too old to have a husband. Even if I should say, “I have hope,” even if I should have a husband tonight and should bear sons,
RUT 1:13 would you wait for them until they were grown up? Would you remain single for them? No, my daughters! My heart grieves for you, for the Lord has sent me adversity.’
RUT 1:14 Then they again wept aloud, and Orpah kissed her mother-in-law goodbye, but Ruth stayed with her.
RUT 1:15 ‘Look,’ said Naomi, ‘your sister-in-law is going back to her own people and to her own gods. Go along with her!’
RUT 1:16 But Ruth answered, ‘Do not urge me to leave you or to go back. I will go where you go, and I will stay wherever you stay. Your people will be my people, and your God my God;
RUT 1:17 I will die where you die, and be buried there. May the Lord bring a curse upon me, if anything but death separate you and me.’
RUT 1:18 When Naomi saw that Ruth was determined to go with her, she ceased urging her to return.
RUT 1:19 So they journeyed on until they came to Bethlehem. Their arrival stirred the whole town, and the women said, ‘Can this be Naomi?’
RUT 1:20 ‘Do not call me Naomi,’ she said to them, ‘call me Mara, for the Almighty has given me a bitter lot.
RUT 1:21 I had plenty when I left, but the Lord has brought me back empty handed. Why should you call me Naomi, now that the Lord has afflicted me, and the Almighty has brought misfortune on me?’
RUT 1:22 So Naomi and Ruth, her Moabite daughter-in-law, returned from Moab. They reached Bethlehem at the beginning of the barley harvest.
RUT 2:1 Now Naomi was related through her husband to a very wealthy man of the family of Elimelech named Boaz.
RUT 2:2 Ruth the Moabite said to Naomi, ‘Let me now go into the fields and gather leftover grain behind anyone who will allow me.’ ‘Go, my daughter,’ she replied.
RUT 2:3 So she went to glean in the field after the reapers. As it happened, she was in that part of the field which belonged to Boaz, who was of the family of Elimelech.
RUT 2:4 When Boaz came from Bethlehem and said to the reapers, ‘The Lord be with you,’ they answered him, ‘May the Lord bless you.’
RUT 2:5 ‘Whose girl is this?’ Boaz asked his servant who had charge of the reapers.
RUT 2:6 The servant who had charge of the reapers replied, ‘It is the Moabite girl who came back with Naomi from the territory of Moab.
RUT 2:7 She asked to be allowed to glean and gather sheaves after the reapers. So she came and has continued to work until now and she has not rested a moment in the field.’
RUT 2:8 Then Boaz said to Ruth, ‘Listen, my daughter. Do not go to glean in another field nor leave this place, but stay here with my girls.
RUT 2:9 Watch where the men are reaping and follow the gleaners. I have told the young men not to trouble you. When you are thirsty, go to the jars and drink of that which the young men have drawn.’
RUT 2:10 Then she bowed low and said to him, ‘Why are you so kind to me, to take interest in me when I am just a foreigner?’
RUT 2:11 Boaz replied, ‘I have heard what you have done for your mother-in-law since the death of your husband, and how you left your father and mother and your native land to come to a people that you did not know before.
RUT 2:12 May the Lord repay you for what you have done, and may you be fully rewarded by the God of Israel, under whose wings you have come to take refuge.’
RUT 2:13 Then she said, ‘I trust I may please you, my lord, for you have comforted me and spoken kindly to your servant, although I am not really equal to one of your own servants.’
RUT 2:14 At mealtime Boaz said to Ruth, ‘Come here and eat some of the food and dip your piece of bread in the vinegar.’ So she sat beside the reapers, and he passed her some roasted grain. She ate until she was satisfied and had some left.
RUT 2:15 When she rose to glean, Boaz gave this order to his young men: ‘Let her glean even among the sheaves and do not disturb her.
RUT 2:16 Also pull out some for her from the bundles and leave for her to glean, and do not find fault with her.’
RUT 2:17 So she gleaned in the field until evening, then beat out what she had gleaned. It was about a bushel of barley.
RUT 2:18 Then she took it up and went into the town and showed her mother-in-law what she had gleaned. She also brought out and gave her that which she had left from her meal after she had had enough.
RUT 2:19 ‘Where did you glean today, and where did you work?’ asked her mother-in-law. ‘A blessing on him who took notice of you!’ So she told her mother-in-law where she had worked. ‘The name of the man with whom I worked today,’ she said, ‘is Boaz.’
RUT 2:20 Naomi said to her daughter-in-law, ‘May the blessing of the Lord rest on this man who has not ceased to show his loving-kindness to the living and to the dead. The man,’ she added, ‘is a near relation of ours.’
RUT 2:21 ‘He told me,’ Ruth said, ‘that I must keep near his young men until they have completed all his harvest.’
RUT 2:22 Naomi said to Ruth, ‘It is best, my daughter, that you should go out with his girls because you might not be as safe in another field.’
RUT 2:23 So she gleaned with the girls of Boaz until the end of the barley and wheat harvest; but she lived with her mother-in-law.
RUT 3:1 One day, Naomi said to Ruth, ‘My daughter, should I not seek to secure a home for you where you will be happy and prosperous?
RUT 3:2 Is not Boaz, with whose girls you have been, a relative of ours?
RUT 3:3 Tonight he is going to winnow barley on the threshing-floor. So bathe and anoint yourself and put on your best clothes and go down to the threshing-floor. But do not make yourself known to the man until he has finished eating and drinking.
RUT 3:4 Then when he lies down, mark the place where he lies. Go in, uncover his feet, lie down, and then he will tell you what to do.’
RUT 3:5 ‘I will do as you say.’ Ruth said to her.
RUT 3:6 So she went down to the threshing-floor and did just as her mother-in-law told her.
RUT 3:7 When Boaz had finished eating and drinking and was in a happy mood, he went to lie down at the end of the heap of grain. Then Ruth came quietly and uncovered his feet and lay down.
RUT 3:8 At midnight the man was startled and turned over, and there was a woman lying at his feet!
RUT 3:9 ‘Who are you?’ he said. ‘I am Ruth your servant,’ she answered, ‘Spread your cloak over your servant, for you are a near relative.’
RUT 3:10 He said, ‘May you be blest by the Lord, my daughter. You have shown me greater favour now than at first, for you have not followed young men, whether poor or rich.
RUT 3:11 My daughter, have no fear. I will do for you all that you ask, for the whole town knows that you are a virtuous woman.
RUT 3:12 Now it is true that I am a near relative, but there is another man nearer than I.
RUT 3:13 Stay here tonight, and then in the morning, if he will perform for you the duty of a kinsman, well, let him do it. But if he will not perform for you the duty of a kinsman, then as surely as the Lord lives, I will do it for you. Lie down until morning.’
RUT 3:14 So she lay at his feet until morning, but rose before anyone could recognise her, for Boaz said, ‘No one must know that a woman came to the threshing-floor.’
RUT 3:15 He also said, ‘Bring the cloak which you have on and hold it.’ So she held it while he poured into it six measures of barley and laid it on her shoulders. Then he went into the city.
RUT 3:16 When Ruth came to her mother-in-law, Naomi asked, ‘Is it you, my daughter?’ Then Ruth told Naomi all that the man had done for her.
RUT 3:17 ‘He gave me these six measures of barley,’ she said, ‘for he said I should not go to my mother-in-law empty-handed.’
RUT 3:18 ‘Wait quietly, my daughter.’ Naomi said, ‘Until you know how the affair will turn out, for the man will not rest unless he settles it all today.’
RUT 4:1 Then Boaz went up to the gate and sat down. Just then the near kinsman of whom Boaz had spoken came along. Boaz said, ‘Hello, So-and-so (calling him by name), come here and sit down.’ So he stopped and sat down.
RUT 4:2 Boaz also took ten of the town elders and said, ‘Sit down here.’ So they sat down.
RUT 4:3 Then he said to the near relative, ‘Naomi, who has come back from the country of Moab, is offering for sale the piece of land which belonged to our relative Elimelech,
RUT 4:4 and I thought that I would lay the matter before you, suggesting that you buy it in the presence of these men who sit here and of the elders of my people. If you will buy it and so keep it in the possession of the family, do so; but if not; then tell me, so that I may know; for no one but you has the right to buy it, and I am next to you.’ ‘I will buy it,’ he said.
RUT 4:5 Then Boaz said, ‘On the day you buy the field from Naomi, you must also marry Ruth the Moabite, the widow of the dead, in order to preserve the name of the dead in connection with his inheritance.’
RUT 4:6 ‘I cannot buy it for myself without spoiling my own inheritance,’ the near relative said. ‘You take my right of buying it as a relative, because I cannot do so.’
RUT 4:7 Now this used to be the custom in Israel: to make valid anything relating to a matter of redemption or exchange, a man drew off his sandal and gave it to the other man; and this was the way contracts were attested in Israel.
RUT 4:8 So when the near relative said to Boaz, ‘Buy it for yourself,’ Boaz drew off the man’s sandal.
RUT 4:9 Then Boaz said to the elders and to all the people, ‘You are witnesses at this time that I have bought all that was Elimelech’s and all that was Chilion’s and Mahlon’s from Naomi.
RUT 4:10 Moreover I have secured Ruth the Moabite, the wife of Mahlon, to be my wife, in order to perpetuate the name of the dead in connection with his inheritance, so that his name will not disappear from among his relatives and from the household where he lived. You are witnesses this day.’
RUT 4:11 Then all the people who were at the gate and the elders said, ‘We are witnesses. May the Lord make the woman who is coming into your house like Rachel and Leah, who together built the house of Israel. May you do well in Ephrata, and become famous in Bethlehem.
RUT 4:12 From the children whom the Lord will give you by this young woman may your household become like the household of Perez, whom Tamar bore to Judah.’
RUT 4:13 So Boaz married Ruth, and she became his wife; and the Lord gave to her a son.
RUT 4:14 Then the women said to Naomi, ‘Blessed be the Lord who has not left you at this time without a near relative, and may his name be famous in Israel.
RUT 4:15 This child will restore your vigor and nourish you in your old age; for your daughter-in-law who loves you, who is worth more to you than seven sons, has borne a son to Boaz!’
RUT 4:16 So Naomi took the child in her arms and cared for him as if he was her own.
RUT 4:17 The women of the neighbourhood gave him a name, saying, ‘A son is born to Naomi!’ They named him Obed. He became the father of Jesse, who was the father of David.
RUT 4:18 This is the genealogy of Perez: Perez was the father of Hezron,
RUT 4:19 Hezron of Ram, Ram of Amminadab,
RUT 4:20 Amminidab of Nashon, Nashon of Salmon,
RUT 4:21 Salmon of Boaz, Boaz of Obed,
RUT 4:22 Obed of Jesse, Jesse of David.
EST 1:1 These events happened in the time of Ahasuerus, who ruled over a hundred and twenty-seven provinces from India to Ethiopia
EST 1:2 from his royal throne in the fortified palace of Susa.
EST 1:3 In the third year of his reign, the king gave a feast for all his officers and courtiers. The commanders of the military forces of Persia and Media, the nobles and provincial rulers were present
EST 1:4 while for one hundred and eighty days he showed them the glorious riches of his kingdom and the costliness of his magnificent regalia.
EST 1:5 When these days were ended, the king held a banquet for all the people who were present in the royal palace at Susa, high and low alike. It was a seven days’ feast in the enclosed garden of the royal palace.
EST 1:6 There were white and violet cotton curtains fastened to silver rings and pillars of marble with cords of fine purple wool and linen. The couches were of gold and silver placed upon a mosaic pavement of alabaster, white marble, mother-of-pearl, and dark stone.
EST 1:7 Drink was brought in vessels of gold – which were all different – and the king’s wine was provided with royal liberality.
EST 1:8 The drinking was unrestricted, for the king had directed all the officers of his household to let each man do as he pleased.
EST 1:9 Queen Vashti also gave a feast for the women in the King Ahasuerus’ royal palace.
EST 1:10 On the seventh day, when the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, Abagtha, Zathar and Carkas, his seven eunuch attendants
EST 1:11 to bring Queen Vashti before him with the royal diadem on her head, to show her beauty to the people and the officials, for she was very beautiful.
EST 1:12 But Queen Vashti refused to come as the king commanded through the eunuchs. Then the king became very angry and his fury burned within him.
EST 1:13 The king turned to the wise men who knew the precedents, for it was his custom to confer with those wise in law.
EST 1:14 Those next to him were Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena and Memucan, seven officials of Persia and Media who had access to the king and were highest in the kingdom.
EST 1:15 ‘Queen Vashti’, the king said, ‘has failed to obey my royal command – the command of King Ahasuerus conveyed through the eunuchs! What does the law say should be done to her?’
EST 1:16 Memucan replied before the king and the officials, ‘Queen Vashti has done wrong not only to the king but also to all the officials and to all the peoples in all of the king’s provinces.
EST 1:17 The refusal of the queen will be reported to all the women with the result that it will make them despise their husbands. They will say, “King Ahasuerus commanded Queen Vashti to be brought in before him, but she did not come!”
EST 1:18 This very day the ladies of Persia and Media who have heard of the refusal of the queen will tell it to all the king’s officials, and there will be contempt and strife!
EST 1:19 If it seems best to the king, let him send out a royal edict. Let it be written among the laws of Persia and Media, never to be repealed, that Vashti may never again come before King Ahasuerus. Let the king give her place as queen to another who is more worthy than she.
EST 1:20 When the king’s decree which he makes is heard throughout his kingdom – great as it is – the wives of all classes will give honour to their husbands.’
EST 1:21 The proposal pleased the king and the officials, and the king did as Memucan advised.
EST 1:22 He sent letters to all the provinces, to every province in its own system of writing and to every people in their language, that every man should be master in his own house!
EST 2:1 Some time later, when the wrath of King Ahasuerus had subsided, he remembered what Vashti had done and what had been decreed against her.
EST 2:2 Then the king’s servants who waited upon him said, ‘Let beautiful young virgins be sought for the king,
EST 2:3 and let the king appoint commissioners to all the provinces of his kingdom to gather them all to Susa the royal residence. Let them be brought into the women’s quarters under the custody of Hegai, the king’s eunuch, who has charge of the women. Then give them what is needed to make them beautiful,
EST 2:4 and let the girl who pleases the king be queen instead of Vashti.’ The proposal pleased the king so he put it into action.
EST 2:5 In Susa the royal residence lived a Jew named Mordecai. He was son of Jair, son of Shimei, son of Kish, a Benjamite.
EST 2:6 (Kish had been carried away from Jerusalem with the exiles who were deported with Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon took captive.)
EST 2:7 Mordecai had adopted Hadassah, that is, Esther, his uncle’s daughter, since she had neither father nor mother. The girl was shapely and beautiful; and after her father and mother died, Mordecai raised her as if she was his own daughter.
EST 2:8 When the king’s command and decree were known, many girls were gathered together to Susa the capital under the custody of Hegai. Esther was also taken into the king’s palace and placed under the custody of Hegai, who had charge of the women.
EST 2:9 The girl pleased him and gained his favour, so that he quickly gave her the cosmetics she needed to enhance her beauty and her allowance of food and the seven maids selected from the king’s household. He also transferred her and her maids to the best place in the harem.
EST 2:10 Esther had not revealed her people nor her family background because Mordecai had ordered her not to.
EST 2:11 Every day Mordecai would walk in front of the courtyard of the harem and ask after Esther’s health and what was happening to her.
EST 2:12 The girls were prepared for meeting King Ahasuerus for twelve months: six months being treated with oil of myrrh and six months with perfumes and cosmetics. After the twelve months,
EST 2:13 each girl went in to the king. She was allowed to take with her whatever she wished from the women’s quarters,
EST 2:14 and would enter the palace in the evening and return the next morning to another part of the harem under the care of the king’s eunuch Shaashgaz who was in charge of concubines. She would not go to the king again unless he desired her and summoned her by name.
EST 2:15 When it was the turn of Esther (the girl adopted by Mordecai, daughter of his uncle Abihail) to go in to the king, she only took with her those things that Hegai, the king’s eunuch in charge of the women, had advised her to take. Esther was liked by all who saw her.
EST 2:16 Esther was taken to King Ahasuerus in the royal palace in the tenth month, the month of Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reign.
EST 2:17 And the king loved her more than all the other women, and she became his favourite and won his affection. He placed the royal diadem on her head and made her queen instead of Vashti.
EST 2:18 Then the king gave a great feast to all his officials and courtiers in honour of Esther, and he remitted the taxes of the provinces and distributed gifts with royal liberality.
EST 2:19 All the time the virgins were assembled again, Mordecai was sitting as an offical at the king’s gate.
EST 2:20 Esther had not revealed her people or family background because she still obeyed him as she had when he was bringing her up.
EST 2:21 In those days while Mordecai was sitting in the king’s gate, two of the royal court attendants, Bigthan and Teresh, who guarded the entrance of the palace, became enraged and attempted to kill King Ahasuerus.
EST 2:22 But Mordecai learned of the conspiracy and disclosed it to Queen Esther, and she told the king on Mordecai’s behalf.
EST 2:23 When the affair was investigated and the facts discovered, the conspirators were both hanged on the gallows. The incident was recorded in the presence of the king in the daily record of events.
EST 3:1 After these events King Ahasuerus promoted Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him to a place above all the officials who were with him.
EST 3:2 All the king’s courtiers who were in the king’s gate used to bow down before Haman, for so the king had commanded, but Mordecai did not bow down nor prostrate himself.
EST 3:3 Then the king’s courtiers, who were in the king’s gate, said to Mordecai, ‘Why do you disobey the king’s command?’
EST 3:4 When they had spoken to him day after day without his listening to them, they informed Haman, to see whether Mordecai’s acts would be tolerated, for he had told them that he was a Jew.
EST 3:5 When Haman saw that Mordecai did not bow down nor prostrate himself before him, he was furious.
EST 3:6 But it seemed to him beneath his dignity to lay hands on Mordecai alone, for they had told him who Mordecai’s people were. Instead Haman sought to destroy all the people of Mordecai, all the Jews throughout the kingdom of Ahasuerus.
EST 3:7 In the first month (the month of Nisan) in the twelfth year of the reign of King Ahasuerus, Haman had “pur” (which means “lot”) cast before him to determine the best day and best month for his actions. The lot fell on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month – the month of Adar.
EST 3:8 So Haman said to King Ahasuerus, ‘There is a certain people scattered among the peoples in all the provinces of your kingdom, whose laws differ from those of every other and who do not keep the king’s laws. Therefore it is not right for the king to tolerate them.
EST 3:9 If it seems best to the king, let an order be given to destroy them, and I will pay ten thousand silver coins into the royal treasury.’
EST 3:10 So the king took off his signet ring from his hand and gave it to Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the enemy of the Jews.
EST 3:11 ‘The money is yours,’ the king said to Haman, ‘and the people also to do with them as you wish.’
EST 3:12 And so, on the thirteenth day of the first month, the king’s secretaries were summoned and as Haman instructed an edict was issued to the king’s satraps and provincial governors and the rulers of each of the peoples in their own script and their own language. The edict was written in the name of King Ahasuerus and sealed with his ring.
EST 3:13 Dispatches were sent by couriers to all the king’s provinces, saying: Destroy, kill, put an end to all the Jews, young and old, little children and women, on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, and plunder their possessions.
EST 3:14 A copy of the edict was to be published as a decree in every province – publicly displayed so that everyone might be ready for that day.
EST 3:15 By command of the king the couriers raced off, and the edict was published in Susa itself. Then the king and Haman sat down to drink, but the city of Susa was in turmoil.
EST 4:1 When Mordecai learned all that had been done, he tore his clothes and put on sackcloth and strewed ashes on his head, and went out into the city and raised a loud and bitter cry of lamentation.
EST 4:2 He went as far as the king’s gate, but no one could enter the gate clothed with sackcloth.
EST 4:3 In every province, wherever the king’s command and decree went, there was great mourning, fasting, weeping, and wailing among the Jews. Many of them sat in sackcloth and ashes.
EST 4:4 When Esther’s maids and attendants told her about Mordecai’s behaviour, she was greatly troubled. She sent garments for Mordecai to put on, so that he could take off his sack-cloth, but he would not accept them.
EST 4:5 So Esther called Hathach, one of the king’s eunuchs whom he had appointed to attend her, and ordered him to go to Mordecai to learn what it all meant and the reason for it.
EST 4:6 So Hathach went out to Mordecai, to the city square in front of the king’s gate.
EST 4:7 Mordecai told him all that had happened to him and the exact amount of money that Haman had promised to pay into the king’s treasury for the destruction of the Jews.
EST 4:8 Also he gave him a copy of the decree to destroy them, that had been published in Susa, to show to Esther for her information. He also told her to go to the king and implore his mercy and to plead with him in behalf of her people.
EST 4:9 When Hathach came and told Esther what Mordecai had said,
EST 4:10 she instructed Hathach to go and say to Mordecai,
EST 4:11 ‘All the king’s courtiers and the people of the king’s provinces know that for every man or woman who goes to the king into the inner court without being called there is one penalty, death, unless the king holds out the golden sceptre signifying that they may live. It has been thirty days since I have been called to go in to the king.’
EST 4:12 When Mordecai was told what Esther had said,
EST 4:13 he sent back this reply to Esther, ‘Don’t imagine that you alone of all the Jews will escape because you belong to the king’s household.
EST 4:14 If you persist in remaining silent at this time, relief and deliverance will come to the Jews from another quarter, but you and your family will perish. Who knows? Maybe you have been raised to the throne for a time like this!’
EST 4:15 Then Esther sent this message to Mordecai:
EST 4:16 ‘Go, gather all the Jews in Susa and fast for me. Don’t eat nor drink anything for three days and nights. My maids and I will fast as well. Then I will go in to the king, although it is contrary to the law, and if I die, I die.’
EST 4:17 Mordecai did everything Esther had directed.
EST 5:1 On the third day, Esther put on her regalia and stood in the inner court of the royal palace opposite the king’s house. The king was sitting on his throne in the palace, opposite the entrance.
EST 5:2 When he saw Esther the queen standing in the court, she won his favour, and he held out to her the golden sceptre that was in his hand. So Esther approached and touched the top of the sceptre.
EST 5:3 Then the king said to her, ‘What is it, Queen Esther? Whatever your request is, it will be granted, even if it is the half of the kingdom.’
EST 5:4 ‘If it seems best to the king,’ Esther said, ‘let the king and Haman come today to the banquet that I have prepared for him.’
EST 5:5 Then the king ordered, ‘Bring Haman quickly, so that Esther’s wish may be gratified.’ So the king and Haman went to the banquet that Esther had prepared.
EST 5:6 While they were drinking wine, the king said to Esther, ‘Whatever your petition is, it will be granted. Your request, it will be done – even if it takes half of my kingdom.’
EST 5:7 Esther answered,
EST 5:8 ‘If I have won the king’s favour and if it seems best to the king to grant my petition and to accede to my request, my petition and my request are that the king and Haman come to the banquet which I will prepare for them. Tomorrow I will answer the king’s question as he wishes.’
EST 5:9 Haman went out that day joyful and elated, but when he saw Mordecai in the king’s gate and noticed that he neither stood up nor moved for him, he was furiously angry with Mordecai.
EST 5:10 Nevertheless Haman restrained himself and went home. He called together his friends and Zeresh his wife
EST 5:11 and recounted to them the greatness of his wealth, how many children he had, and all the ways in which the king had honoured him, and how he had promoted him above the officials and the royal courtiers.
EST 5:12 ‘What is more,’ Haman said, ‘Queen Esther brought no one in with the king to the banquet which she had prepared except me, and tomorrow also I am invited by her along with the king.
EST 5:13 Yet all this does not satisfy me as long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king’s gate.’
EST 5:14 Then Zeresh his wife and all his friends said to him, ‘Let a gallows seventy-five feet high be erected, and in the morning speak to the king and let Mordecai be hanged on it. Then go merrily with the king to the banquet.’ The advice pleased Haman, and so he had the gallows erected.
EST 6:1 On that night the king was unable to sleep, so he gave orders to bring the books that recorded memorable deeds, and they were read before the king.
EST 6:2 It was found recorded how Mordecai had furnished information regarding Bigthan and Teresh, two of the king’s attendants who guarded the entrance of the palace, who had attempted to kill King Ahasuerus.
EST 6:3 ‘What honour and dignity have been conferred on Mordecai for this?’ the king asked. When the king’s pages who waited on him replied ‘Nothing has been done for him,’
EST 6:4 the king said, ‘Who is in the court?’ Now Haman had just entered the outer court of the king’s house to speak to the king about hanging Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him.
EST 6:5 So the king’s pages said to him, ‘Haman is standing there, in the court.’ The king said, ‘Let him enter.’
EST 6:6 So Haman entered, and the king said to him, ‘What should be done for the man whom the king wishes to honour?’ Haman said to himself, ‘Whom besides me could the king wish to honour?’
EST 6:7 So he said to the king, ‘For the man whom the king wishes to honour
EST 6:8 let a royal garment be brought, which the king has worn, and the horse on which the king has ridden and on whose head a royal diadem has been placed.
EST 6:9 Then let the garment and the horse be placed in charge of one of the king’s noble officials. Let him clothe the man whom the king wishes to honour and let him lead that man on the horse through the city square, proclaiming before him, “This is what is done for the man whom the king wishes to honour.”’
EST 6:10 Then the king said to Haman, ‘Make haste and take the garment and the horse, as you have said, and do this to Mordecai the Jew, who sits in the king’s gate. Omit nothing of all you have said.’
EST 6:11 So Haman took the garment and the horse and clothed Mordecai, and made him ride through the city square and proclaimed before him, ‘This is what is done for the man whom the king wishes to honour.’
EST 6:12 Mordecai returned to the king’s gate, but Haman hurried to his house, mourning, with his head covered.
EST 6:13 Haman recounted to Zeresh his wife and to all his friends everything that had happened to him. Then his wise men and Zeresh his wife said to him, ‘If Mordecai before whom you have already been humiliated is of the Jewish people, you can do nothing against him but will surely fall before him.’
EST 6:14 While they were still talking with him, the king’s attendants came and quickly took Haman to the banquet that Esther had prepared.
EST 7:1 So the king and Haman went to drink with Queen Esther.
EST 7:2 As they were drinking wine on that second day, the king again said to Esther, ‘Whatever your petition is, Queen Esther, it will be granted to you. Whatever you request it will be done, even if it takes half of the kingdom.’
EST 7:3 Then Queen Esther answered, ‘Your Majesty, if I have won your favour, and if it seems best to Your Majesty, let my life be given me as my petition, and my people as my request,
EST 7:4 for I and my people have been sold to be destroyed, killed, and completely annihilated! If we had been merely sold into slavery I would not have disturbed your peace, because such a fate would not have affected the interests of the king.’
EST 7:5 Then King Ahasuerus said to Queen Esther, ‘Who is he and where is he whose heart has impelled him to do this?’
EST 7:6 ‘A foe, an enemy: this wicked Haman.’ Esther answered. Haman shrank in terror before the king and the queen.
EST 7:7 In his wrath the king rose from the place where he was drinking wine and went into the palace garden. Haman stayed to beg Queen Esther for his life, for he saw that the king was fully determined to bring calamity upon him.
EST 7:8 As the king returned from the palace garden to the banquet hall, Haman had flung himself on Esther’s couch. The king cried, ‘Is he going to rape my queen while I am present in my own house?’ As the king spoke these words, the attendants covered Haman’s face
EST 7:9 and Harbonah, one of those who waited on the king, said, ‘There are the gallows, seventy-five feet high, which Hainan erected for Mordecai, who spoke a good word in behalf of the king, standing in the house of Haman!’ The king said ‘Hang him on them.’
EST 7:10 So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai. Then the wrath of the king was pacified.
EST 8:1 At that time King Ahasuerus gave the property of Haman the Jews’ enemy to Queen Esther. Mordecai was made one of the king’s personal advisers, for Esther had disclosed his relationship to her.
EST 8:2 The king also drew off his signet ring, which he had taken from Haman. He gave it to Mordecai, and Esther placed Mordecai in charge of Haman’s property.
EST 8:3 Then Esther sought another audience with the king and fell at his feet and with tears begged him to avert the evil planned by Haman the Agagite and to frustrate his designs against the Jews.
EST 8:4 The king held out to her the golden sceptre, and she arose and stood before him.
EST 8:5 ‘If it seems best to the king,’ she said, ‘and if I have won his favour and he thinks it right, and if I please him, let written orders be given to revoke the dispatches devised by Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he wrote ordering the destruction of the Jews who are in all the king’s provinces.
EST 8:6 For how can I bear to look upon the evil that will come to my people? How can I bear to see their destruction?’
EST 8:7 Then King Ahasuerus said to Queen Esther and to Mordecai the Jew, ‘See, I have given Esther the property of Haman, and they have hanged him on the gallows, because he laid hands upon the Jews.
EST 8:8 Now you write on behalf of the Jews, as seems best to you, in the king’s name and seal it with the king’s signet ring. For a document that is written in the king’s name and sealed with the king’s signet ring cannot be revoked.’
EST 8:9 On the twenty-third day of the third month (that is the month of Sivan), the king’s secretaries were summoned and as Mordecai instructed an edict was issued to the Jews, to the satraps and provincial governors and the rulers of each of the one hundred twenty-seven provinces from India to Ethiopia in their own script and their own language, and to the Jews in their own script and language.
EST 8:10 Mordecai wrote in the name of King Ahasuerus. He sealed it with the king’s signet ring. Dispatches were sent by mounted couriers who rode the swift, noble steeds, bred of the royal studs.
EST 8:11 In this way the king permitted the Jews who were in every city to gather together and make a stand for their life, to destroy, to kill, and annihilate all the armed forces of any people or province that might be hostile to them, including their children and women, and to take their goods as plunder
EST 8:12 throughout all the provinces of King Ahasuerus on that thirteenth day of the twelfth month (which is called Adar).
EST 8:13 A copy of the edict was to be published as a decree in every province – publicly displayed so that the Jews might be ready for that day and avenge themselves.
EST 8:14 So the couriers who rode the swift, noble steeds went out, hastened and impelled by the king’s commands! Meantime the decree had been given out in the royal palace at Susa;
EST 8:15 and Mordecai had gone out from the presence of the king in royal garments of violet and white and with a great crown of gold and with a robe of fine linen and purple. The people of Susa shouted and were glad.
EST 8:16 To the Jews there came light and gladness and joy and honour.
EST 8:17 And in every province and city, wherever the king’s command and decree came, there was gladness and joy among the Jews and a holiday. Many of the peoples of the earth professed to be Jews, for fear of the Jews took possession of them.
EST 9:1 Now in the twelfth month (that is the month of Adar), on the thirteenth day, when the king’s command and his decree was about to put into execution, on the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to gain the mastery over them, then the tables were turned so that the Jews had the mastery over those who hated them.
EST 9:2 The Jews gathered together in the cities throughout all the provinces of King Ahasuerus, to attack anyone who tried to harm them. No one could withstand them, for the fear of them had fallen on all the peoples.
EST 9:3 All the princes of the provinces and the satraps and the governors and they who attended to the king’s business, helped the Jews, because the fear of Mordecai had fallen on them.
EST 9:4 For Mordecai was great in the king’s palace, and as his power increased his fame spread throughout all the provinces.
EST 9:5 The Jews put all their enemies to the sword and, with slaughter and destruction, they did what they wanted to those who hated them.
EST 9:6 In Susa the capital the Jews killed five hundred people.
EST 9:7 They killed Parshandatha, Dalphon, Aspatha,
EST 9:8 Poratha, Adalia, Aridatha,
EST 9:9 Parmashta, Arisia, Aridai, and Vaizatha,
EST 9:10 the ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Jews’ enemy; but they did not take any plunder.
EST 9:11 On that day the number of those who were slain in Susa was brought before the king,
EST 9:12 and the king said to Queen Esther, ‘The Jews have slain five hundred people in Susa, and the ten sons of Haman. What then have they done in the rest of the king’s provinces! Now what is your petition? It will be granted to you. What is your request? It will be done.’
EST 9:13 ‘If it please the king,’ Esther said, ‘let it be granted to the Jews who are in Susa to do tomorrow also according to this day’s decree. Let the bodies of Haman’s ten sons be hanged on the gallows.’
EST 9:14 And the king commanded it to be done. A decree was given out in Susa and they hung the bodies of Haman’s ten sons on the gallows.
EST 9:15 The Jews who were in Susa gathered themselves together again on the fourteenth day of the month of Adar. They killed three hundred people in Susa. But they did not take any plunder.
EST 9:16 And the other Jews who were in the king’s provinces gathered themselves together and fought for their lives and overcame their enemies. They killed seventy-five thousand who hated them. But they did not take any plunder.
EST 9:17 This was on the thirteenth day of Adar. On the fourteenth day of the month Adar the Jews rested and made it a day of feasting and rejoicing.
EST 9:18 (But the Jews in Susa gathered on both the thirteenth and fourteenth day – and rested on the fifteenth day of the same month and made it a day of feasting and rejoicing.)
EST 9:19 This is why the Jews who live in the country villages keep the fourteenth day of the month of Adar as a day of rejoicing and feasting and a holiday, and a day in which they send gifts of food to each other.
EST 9:20 Mordecai had these things recorded. He sent letters to all the Jews who were in all the provinces of the King Ahasuerus, both near and far.
EST 9:21 He told them to keep the fourteenth day of the month of Adar and also the fifteenth day every year,
EST 9:22 as the days on which the Jews had rest from their enemies, and the month which was turned from sorrow to gladness and from mourning into a feast day. They should make them days of feasting and gladness and of sending gifts of food to each other and of gifts to the poor.
EST 9:23 So what the Jews had begun to do they adopted as a custom, just as Mordecai had written to them.
EST 9:24 For Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had plotted to destroy them. He had cast “Pur”, that is the lot, intending to consume them and to destroy them.
EST 9:25 But when the matter came before the king, he gave written orders that his wicked plot, which he had planned against the Jews, should come upon his own head, and that he and his sons should be hanged on the gallows.
EST 9:26 This is why these days are called Purim, after the word Pur. Therefore because of all the words of this letter, as well as all they had seen, and all they had experienced,
EST 9:27 the Jews established and made it a custom for them, for their descendants, and for all who should join them, so that it might not be repealed, that they should continue to observe these two days as feasts each year,
EST 9:28 and that these days should be remembered and kept throughout every generation, every family, every province, and every city. And these days of Purim should not pass away from among the Jews nor the remembrance of them disappear among their descendants.
EST 9:29 Queen Esther, the daughter of Abihail, gave Mordecai the Jew all authority in writing to confirm this second letter of Purim.
EST 9:30 He sent letters to all the Jews, to the hundred and twenty-seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, wishing them peace and security,
EST 9:31 to confirm these days of Purim in their proper times, to be observed as Mordecai the Jew and Queen Esther had directed and as the Jews had proscribed for themselves and their descendants, in the matter of the fastings and their cry of lamentation.
EST 9:32 And the commands of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim; and it was written in the records.
EST 10:1 King Ahasuerus imposed a tribute on the land and the coasts.
EST 10:2 All the acts of his power and of his might, and the full account of the greatness of Mordecai to which the king advanced him, are they not recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia?
EST 10:3 For Mordecai the Jew was next in rank to King Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and loved by them all. He sought the good of his people and promoted the welfare of their descendants.
PSA 1:1 Happy are those who do not follow the counsel of the wicked, not halting in ways frequented by sinners, nor taking a seat in a gathering of scoffers.
PSA 1:2 But the law of the Lord is their joy, they study it day and night.
PSA 1:3 They are like trees planted by runlets of water, yielding fruit in due season, leaves never fading. In all that they do, they prosper.
PSA 1:4 Not so fare the wicked, not so; like chaff are they, blown by the wind.
PSA 1:5 So the wicked will not stand firm in the judgment, nor sinners appear, when the righteous are gathered.
PSA 1:6 For the way of the righteous is dear to the Lord, but the way of the wicked will end in ruin.
PSA 2:1 Why this turmoil of nations, this futile plotting of peoples,
PSA 2:2 with kings of the earth conspiring, and rulers consulting together, against the Lord and against his anointed,
PSA 2:3 to snap their bonds and fling their cords away?
PSA 2:4 He whose throne is in heaven laughs, the Lord mocks them.
PSA 2:5 Then he speaks to them in his wrath, and in his hot anger confounds them.
PSA 2:6 ‘This my king is installed by me, on Zion my holy mountain.’
PSA 2:7 I will tell of the Lord’s decree. He said to me: ‘You are my son, this day I became your father.
PSA 2:8 Only ask, and I make you the heir of the nations, and lord of the world to its utmost bounds.
PSA 2:9 You will break them with sceptre of iron, shatter them like pottery.’
PSA 2:10 So now, you kings, be wise: be warned, you rulers of earth.
PSA 2:11 Serve the Lord in awe, kiss his feet with trembling,
PSA 2:12 lest, angry, he hurl you to ruin; for soon will his fury blaze. Happy all who take refuge in him.
PSA 3:1 A psalm of David, when he fled from his son Absalom. How many, Lord, are my foes! Those who rise up against me are many.
PSA 3:2 Many are those who say of me, ‘There is no help for him in his God.’ Selah
PSA 3:3 But you, Lord, are shield about me, my glory, who lifts up my head.
PSA 3:4 When loudly I call to the Lord, from his holy hill he gives answer. Selah
PSA 3:5 I laid down and slept: now I wake, for the Lord sustains me.
PSA 3:6 I fear not the myriads of people who beset me on every side.
PSA 3:7 Arise, Lord: save me, my God, who strikes all my foes on the cheek, and shatters the teeth of the wicked.
PSA 3:8 Victory belongs to the Lord: let your blessing descend on your people. Selah
PSA 4:1 For the leader, with stringed instruments. A psalm of David. Answer my cry, God, my defender. Often from straits you have brought me to spacious places. So now show me your favour and hear my prayer.
PSA 4:2 How long, you proud people, will my honour be stained by the slanders you love, and the lies that you follow? Selah
PSA 4:3 See! The Lord has shown me his wonderful kindness: the Lord hears, when I call to him.
PSA 4:4 Sin not in your anger: but speak in your heart on your bed, and be still. Selah
PSA 4:5 Offer true sacrifice, trust in the Lord.
PSA 4:6 Many are longing for fortune to smile. Lift upon us the light of your face.
PSA 4:7 You have put in my heart, Lord, a deeper joy than was theirs who had corn and wine in abundance.
PSA 4:8 So in peace I will lie down and sleep; for you, Lord, keep me safe.
PSA 5:1 For the leader: A psalm of David, to be accompanied by the flute. Hear my words, Lord: give heed to my whisper.
PSA 5:2 Attend to my loud cry for help, my king and my God.
PSA 5:3 When I pray to you, Lord, in the morning, hear my voice. I make ready for you in the morning, and look for a sign.
PSA 5:4 For you are no God who takes pleasure in wickedness: no one of evil can be your guest.
PSA 5:5 No braggarts can stand in your presence, you hate all workers of wrong.
PSA 5:6 You destroy all speakers of lies, people of blood and deceit you abhor.
PSA 5:7 But I, through your kindness abundant, may enter your house, and towards the shrine of your temple may reverently bow.
PSA 5:8 Lead me, Lord, in your righteousness because of my enemies. Make your way level before me.
PSA 5:9 For their mouth is a stranger to truth, their heart is a pit of destruction. Their throat is a wide open grave, their tongue the smooth tongue of the hypocrite.
PSA 5:10 Condemn them, God; let their schemes bring them down to the ground. For their numberless crimes thrust them down for playing the rebel against you.
PSA 5:11 But let all who take refuge in you ring out their gladness forever. Protect those who love your name, so they may exult in you.
PSA 5:12 For you give your blessing, Lord, to the godly, and the shield of your favour protects them.
PSA 6:1 For the leader; with instrumental music on the sheminith. A psalm of David. Rebuke me not, Lord, in your anger, punish me not in your wrath.
PSA 6:2 Lord, be gracious to me in my weakness. Heal me Lord, for racked is my body;
PSA 6:3 all of me utterly racked. Why do you wait so long, Lord?
PSA 6:4 Turn, Lord, rescue me; save me, because of your love.
PSA 6:5 For in death none can call you to mind; in Sheol who can praise you?
PSA 6:6 I am so weary of sighing. All the night I make my bed swim, and wet my couch with my tears.
PSA 6:7 My eyes swollen with grief; from weeping caused by my foes.
PSA 6:8 Begone, workers of wrong, for the Lord has heard my loud weeping,
PSA 6:9 the Lord has heard my entreaty, the Lord accepts my prayer.
PSA 6:10 My foes will be stricken with terror, brought to shame and dismay in a moment.
PSA 7:1 A Shiggaion of David, which he sang to the Lord about Cush, the Benjamite. Lord my God, I take refuge in you. Deliver me, save me from all who pursue me;
PSA 7:2 or like lions they will tear me to pieces, and rend me, past hope of rescue.
PSA 7:3 Lord, my God, if my life has been such if my hands have been stained with guilt,
PSA 7:4 if friends I paid back with evil, if I plundered my foes without cause,
PSA 7:5 may the enemy chase and find me, trample my life to the ground, my honour leave in the dirt! Selah
PSA 7:6 Arise, Lord, in anger, against my foes rise in fury. Awake for my help: let justice be done.
PSA 7:7 Gather the nations about you, and sit on your lofty throne,
PSA 7:8 as the Lord, the judge of the peoples. Judge me, Lord, in my innocence and according to my integrity.
PSA 7:9 Put an end to the wrong of the wicked, protect the righteous. Searcher of hearts and minds, righteous God.
PSA 7:10 God is my shield: he saves the upright in heart.
PSA 7:11 God is a just judge, constant in righteous anger.
PSA 7:12 He will sharpen his sword without fail, his bow is bent and ready,
PSA 7:13 his deadly weapons are ready, his arrows he makes of flame.
PSA 7:14 The enemy who conceives evil; pregnant with mischief, giving birth to lies,
PSA 7:15 a pit they have made and dug; but into the hole that they made they will fall.
PSA 7:16 On their own heads their mischief comes back; on their own skulls their violence comes down.
PSA 7:17 I will give thanks to the Lord for his justice, and sing to the name of the Lord Most High.
PSA 8:1 For the leader: A psalm of David, to be accompanied by a stringed instrument. Lord our God! How glorious in all the earth is your name! Your praise reaches as high as the heavens,
PSA 8:2 from the mouths of children and infants. You have built a fortress against your enemies, to silence the foe and the rebel.
PSA 8:3 When I look at your heavens, the work of your fingers, the moon and the stars, which you have set there,
PSA 8:4 what are mortals, that you think of them, humans, that you visit them?
PSA 8:5 Yet you made them little less than divine, crowned them with glory and majesty,
PSA 8:6 made them lord of the works of your hands, put all things under their feet –
PSA 8:7 sheep and oxen, all of them; and the wild beasts also:
PSA 8:8 birds of the air, and fish of the sea, and all that crosses the paths of the ocean.
PSA 8:9 Lord our God! How glorious in all the earth is your name!
PSA 9:1 For the leader; ’almuth labben. A psalm of David. With all my heart I will praise the Lord, all your wonders I will rehearse.
PSA 9:2 I will rejoice and exult in you, singing praise to your name, Most High;
PSA 9:3 because backward my foes were turned, they stumbled and perished before you.
PSA 9:4 My right and my claim you have upheld, you did sit on the throne as a fair judge,
PSA 9:5 rebuking the nations, destroying the wicked, and blotting their name out forever and ever.
PSA 9:6 The foe is vanished, ruined forever, their cities destroyed, their memory perished.
PSA 9:7 See! The Lord is seated forever on the throne he established for judgment,
PSA 9:8 ruling the world with justice, and judging the nations with equity.
PSA 9:9 So the Lord proves a haven to the oppressed, a haven in times of trouble.
PSA 9:10 Well may they trust you who know your name, for those who seek you, you never abandon.
PSA 9:11 Sing praise to the Lord, whose home is in Zion, declare his deeds among the nations.
PSA 9:12 As avenger of blood, he keeps them in mind, he does not forget the cry of the wretched.
PSA 9:13 Show me favour, Lord, see how my foes afflict me, lift me up from the gates of death;
PSA 9:14 so I may, in your help exulting, tell forth your praise at the gates of Zion.
PSA 9:15 The nations are sunk in the pit which they made, in the net that they hid, their own foot is entangled.
PSA 9:16 The Lord is revealed in the judgment he wrought, the wicked are snared in their own handiwork. Selah
PSA 9:17 Let the wicked depart to Sheol, all the nations that live forgetful of God.
PSA 9:18 For the needy will not be always forgotten, nor the hope of the helpless be lost forever.
PSA 9:19 Arise, Lord; don’t let them triumph: before your face let the nations be judged.
PSA 9:20 Strike them with fear, Lord: show the nations how frail they are. Selah
PSA 10:1 Why do you stand, Lord, so far away, hiding yourself in times of trouble?
PSA 10:2 The wicked, in their pride, are pursuing the helpless: let them be caught in the schemes they have plotted.
PSA 10:3 For the wicked boasts of their wanton greed; the robber despises the Lord, and curses him,
PSA 10:4 in wicked pride, thinks: God doesn’t care, God doesn’t call to account.
PSA 10:5 Never a season that they do not prosper; your judgments are far above out of their sight: they scoff at their foes.
PSA 10:6 Each says in their heart, ‘I will never be shaken; I will live for all time untouched by misfortune.’
PSA 10:7 Their mouths are full of deceit and oppression: under their tongues lurks mischief and wrong.
PSA 10:8 Lying in secret in some village ambush, and stealthily watching, they murder the innocent.
PSA 10:9 Like a lion that lurks in a secret lair they lurk intending to catch the defenceless; to seize them, to drag them away in their net.
PSA 10:10 Their victims are crushed, sink down to the ground. Under their claws the hapless fall.
PSA 10:11 The wicked say in their hearts that God has forgotten, has hidden his face, will see nothing.
PSA 10:12 Arise, Lord, lift up your hand, do not forget the cry of the wretched.
PSA 10:13 Why do the wicked treat God with contempt, and say in their hearts, ‘God doesn’t care’?
PSA 10:14 You have seen the trouble and sorrow; you mark it all, and will take it in hand. The hapless can count on you, helper of orphans.
PSA 10:15 Break the arm of the wicked and evil: search out their sin, till no more be found.
PSA 10:16 The Lord is king forever and ever: the nations will vanish from his land.
PSA 10:17 Lord, you have heard the desire of the humble, inclining your ear, strengthening their hearts,
PSA 10:18 rights you have won for the crushed and the orphan, so no one on earth may strike terror again.
PSA 11:1 For the leader. Of David. In the Lord I take refuge. How can you tell me to flee like a bird to the mountains?
PSA 11:2 ‘See! The wicked are bending the bow, their arrow is set on the string, to shoot from the shadows at the upright in heart.
PSA 11:3 In this tearing down of foundations what good can a good person do?’
PSA 11:4 The Lord in his holy temple, the Lord in heaven, enthroned. His eyes watch the world, they see everyone.
PSA 11:5 The Lord examines the righteous and wicked, and the lover of violence he hates.
PSA 11:6 On the wicked he rains coals of fire and brimstone, and their drink will be scorching wind.
PSA 11:7 For the Lord is just, and justice he loves; so the upright will see his face.
PSA 12:1 For the leader; on the sheminith. A psalm of David. Help, Lord, for the good are all gone, faithful people have vanished.
PSA 12:2 One lies to another, speaking empty lies, with flattering lips and false hearts they speak.
PSA 12:3 May the Lord cut off all the flattering lips, and the tongue that utters arrogance,
PSA 12:4 they declare, ‘Our tongue is our strength, our allies our lips: who is lord over us?’
PSA 12:5 ‘The poor are despoiled, and the needy are sighing; so now I will act,’ the Lord declares ‘And place them in the safety they long for.’
PSA 12:6 The words of the Lord are words that are pure, silver smelted, seven times refined.
PSA 12:7 You will keep us, Lord, and guard us from this generation forever,
PSA 12:8 in a world where the wicked prowl, and worthless people exalted.
PSA 13:1 For the leader. A psalm of David. How long, Lord, will you forget me forever? How long will you hide your face from me?
PSA 13:2 How long must I nurse grief inside me, and in my heart a daily sorrow? How long are my foes to exult over me?
PSA 13:3 Look at me, answer me, Lord my God. Fill my eyes with your light, lest I sleep in death,
PSA 13:4 lest my enemies claim to have triumphed, lest my foes rejoice at my downfall.
PSA 13:5 But I trust in your kindness: my heart will rejoice in your help.
PSA 13:6 I will sing to the Lord who was good to me.
PSA 14:1 For the leader. Of David. Fools say in their heart, ‘There is no God.’ Vile, hateful their life is; not one does good.
PSA 14:2 From heaven the Lord looks out on humans, to see if any are wise, and care for God.
PSA 14:3 But all have turned bad, the taint is on all; not one does good, no, not one.
PSA 14:4 Have they learned their lesson, those workers of evil? Who ate up my people, eating, devouring, never calling to the Lord.
PSA 14:5 Sore afraid will they be; for God is among those who are righteous,
PSA 14:6 you may mock the plans of the poor, but the Lord is their refuge.
PSA 14:7 If only help from Zion would come for Israel! When the Lord brings his people a change of fortune, how glad will be Jacob, and Israel how joyful!
PSA 15:1 A psalm of David. Lord, who can be guest in your tent? Who may live on your holy mountain?
PSA 15:2 The person whose walk is blameless, whose conduct is right, whose words are true and sincere;
PSA 15:3 on whose tongue there sits no slander, who will not harm a friend,
PSA 15:4 nor cruelly insult a neighbour, who regards with contempt those rejected by God; but honours those who obey the Lord, who keeps an oath, whatever the cost,
PSA 15:5 whose money is lent without interest, and never takes a bribe to hurt the innocent. The person who does these things will always stand firm.
PSA 16:1 A michtam of David. Keep me, O God, for in you I take refuge.
PSA 16:2 I said to the Lord, ‘You are my Lord, my happiness rests in you alone.
PSA 16:3 Those who are holy in the land, they, they alone, are the noble ones; all my delight is in them.’
PSA 16:4 Those who choose other gods find endless sorrow. In their offerings of blood I will have no part nor take their name on my lips.
PSA 16:5 The Lord is my share and my portion, my fate is in your strong hands.
PSA 16:6 The boundary lines of my life mark out delightful country, my heritage pleases me well.
PSA 16:7 I praise the Lord for his counsel, which so stirs my heart in the night.
PSA 16:8 I keep the Lord always in mind: with him at my hand, I can never be moved.
PSA 16:9 So my heart is glad, there is joy inside me; and in safety of body I live.
PSA 16:10 For you will not give me up to Sheol nor let any who love you see the pit.
PSA 16:11 You will show me the path that leads to life, to that fulness of joy which is in your presence, and the pleasures dispensed by your hand evermore.
PSA 17:1 A prayer of David. Listen, O Lord, to my innocence; attend to my piercing cry. Give heed to my prayer out of lips unfeigned.
PSA 17:2 Let my vindication come from you, your eyes see the truth.
PSA 17:3 When you test my heart when you visit at night, and assay me like silver – you can find no evil. I am determined that my mouth should not lie.
PSA 17:4 I gave earnest heed to the words of your lips.
PSA 17:5 My steps have held fast to the paths of your precepts and in your tracks have my feet never stumbled.
PSA 17:6 So I call you, O God, with assurance of answer; bend down your ear to me, hear what I say.
PSA 17:7 Show your marvellous love, you who save from enemies those who take refuge at your right hand.
PSA 17:8 Keep me as the apple of the eye, hide me in the shelter of your wings.
PSA 17:9 From wicked people who do me violence, from deadly foes who crowd around me.
PSA 17:10 They have closed their hearts to pity, the words of their mouths are haughty.
PSA 17:11 Now they dog us at every step, keenly watching, to hurl us to the ground,
PSA 17:12 like a lion, longing to tear, like a young lion, lurking in secret.
PSA 17:13 Arise, Lord, face them and fell them. By your sword set me free from the wicked,
PSA 17:14 by your hand, O Lord, from those – whose portion of life is but of this world. But let your treasured ones have food in plenty may their children be full and their children satisfied.
PSA 17:15 In my innocence I will see your face, awake I am filled with a vision of you.
PSA 18:1 For the leader. Of David, the servant of the Lord, who recited the words of this song to the Lord after the Lord had saved him from the power of all his enemies and from the hand of Saul. He said: I love you, O Lord, my strength.
PSA 18:2 The Lord is my rock, my fortress, deliverer, my God, my rock, where I take refuge, my shield, my defender, my tower.
PSA 18:3 Worthy of praise is the Lord whom I call on, he rescues me from all my foes.
PSA 18:4 The waves of death broke about me, fearful floods of chaos.
PSA 18:5 Sheol threw cords around me, snares of death came to meet me.
PSA 18:6 In distress I cried to the Lord, and shouted for help to my God; in his temple he heard my voice, into his ears came my cry.
PSA 18:7 Then the earth shook and quaked, mountains trembled to their foundations, and quaked because of his wrath.
PSA 18:8 Smoke went up from his nostrils, devouring fire from his mouth, coals were kindled by it.
PSA 18:9 Then he bent the sky and came down, thick darkness was under his feet.
PSA 18:10 He rode on a cherub and flew, darting on wings of wind,
PSA 18:11 with his screen of darkness about him, in thick dark clouds of water.
PSA 18:12 At the radiance before him there passed hailstones and coals of fire.
PSA 18:13 The Lord thundered from heaven, the Most High uttered his voice.
PSA 18:14 He shot his arrows and scattered them, flashed lightnings, and routed them.
PSA 18:15 The channels of the sea were revealed, the world was laid bare to its base, at your rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath of your nostrils.
PSA 18:16 He stretched from on high, he seized me, drew me up from the mighty waters,
PSA 18:17 and saved me from those who hated me – fierce foes, too mighty for me.
PSA 18:18 In my day of distress they assailed me, but the Lord proved my support.
PSA 18:19 To a spacious place he brought me, and, for love of me, he saved me.
PSA 18:20 The Lord repays my innocence, he rewards my cleanness of hands.
PSA 18:21 For I kept the ways of the Lord, nor have wickedly strayed from my God.
PSA 18:22 His commandments were all before me, his statutes I put not away.
PSA 18:23 And I was blameless before him, guarding myself from sin.
PSA 18:24 So the Lord repaid my innocence, my cleanness of hands in his sight.
PSA 18:25 With the loyal you are loyal, and with the blameless blameless.
PSA 18:26 With the pure you show yourself pure, but shrewd with the devious.
PSA 18:27 For the lowly people you save, but haughty eyes you abase.
PSA 18:28 You are my lamp, Lord, my God who enlightens my darkness.
PSA 18:29 With you I can storm a rampart, with my God I can leap a wall.
PSA 18:30 As for God, his way is perfect; the word of the Lord is pure. He is shield to all who take refuge in him.
PSA 18:31 For who is God but the Lord? And who is a rock but our God?
PSA 18:32 The God who arms me with strength, who cleared and smoothed my way.
PSA 18:33 He made my feet like hinds’ feet, and set me up on the heights.
PSA 18:34 He taught my hands how to fight, and my arms how to bend a bronze bow.
PSA 18:35 The shield of your help you gave me, your right hand supports me, you stoop down to make me great.
PSA 18:36 In your strength I took giant strides, and my feet never slipped.
PSA 18:37 So I chased the foe till I caught them, and turned not, till I made an end of them.
PSA 18:38 I smashed them, they could not rise, they fell beneath my feet.
PSA 18:39 You did arm me with strength for war, you did bow my assailants beneath me.
PSA 18:40 You made my foes turn their back to me, and those who did hate me I finished.
PSA 18:41 They cried for help, but none saved them; to the Lord, but he answered them not.
PSA 18:42 I beat them like dust of the market-place, stamped them like mud of the streets.
PSA 18:43 From the strife of the peoples you saved me, you made me head of the nations, peoples I knew not did serve me.
PSA 18:44 On the instant they hear, they obey me, foreigners come to me cringing.
PSA 18:45 Foreigners lose courage, and come out of their strongholds trembling.
PSA 18:46 The Lord is alive! Blest be my rock! Exalted be God, my protector!
PSA 18:47 The God who gave me revenge, and brought down nations beneath me,
PSA 18:48 who saved me from angry foes, and set me above my assailants, safe from the violent.
PSA 18:49 For this I will praise you among the nations, making music, O Lord, to your name:
PSA 18:50 for great triumphs he grants to his king, and faithful love he shows his anointed, to David and his seed evermore.
PSA 19:1 For the leader. A psalm of David. The heavens declare God’s glory, the sky tells what his hands have done.
PSA 19:2 Day tells it to day, night reveals it to night,
PSA 19:3 without speaking, without words; without the sound of voices.
PSA 19:4 But through all the world their voice carries their words to the ends of the earth. He has pitched a tent for the sun in the sky,
PSA 19:5 it comes out like a bridegroom from his bridal chamber, it joyfully runs its course like a hero.
PSA 19:6 From one end of the heavens it rises, and round it runs to the other, and nothing hides from its heat.
PSA 19:7 The law of the Lord is perfect, renewing life. The decrees of the Lord are trusty, making the simple wise.
PSA 19:8 The behests of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart. The command of the Lord is pure, giving light to the eyes.
PSA 19:9 The fear of the Lord is clean, it endures forever. The Lord’s judgments are true and right altogether.
PSA 19:10 More precious are they than gold – than fine gold in plenty, and sweeter they are than honey, that drops from the comb.
PSA 19:11 By them is your servant warned; who keeps them has rich reward.
PSA 19:12 Who can know their flaws? Absolve me from those I know not.
PSA 19:13 Keep your servant from wilful sins – from falling under their sway: then blameless and clear will I be from great offence.
PSA 19:14 May the words of my mouth and the thoughts of my heart be pleasing to you, Lord, my rock and redeemer.
PSA 20:1 For the leader. A psalm of David. The Lord answer you in the day of distress, the name of the Jacob’s God protect you,
PSA 20:2 sending you help from the temple, out of Zion supporting you.
PSA 20:3 All your meal-offerings may he remember, your burnt-offerings look on with favour. Selah
PSA 20:4 May he grant you your heart’s desire, and bring all your plans to pass.
PSA 20:5 We will shout then for joy at your victory, and rejoice in the name of our God. May the Lord grant your every request.
PSA 20:6 Now I am sure that the Lord will help his anointed. From his temple in heaven he will answer by his mighty triumphant right hand.
PSA 20:7 Some in chariots are strong, some in horses; but our strength is the Lord our God.
PSA 20:8 They will totter and fall, while we rise and stand firm.
PSA 20:9 Give victory, Lord, to the king, and answer us when we call.
PSA 21:1 For the leader. A psalm of David. The king rejoices, Lord, in your might, how he exults because of your help!
PSA 21:2 You have granted to him his heart’s desire, you have not withheld his lips’ request. Selah
PSA 21:3 You came to meet him with rich blessings, you set on his head a golden crown.
PSA 21:4 He asked you for life, you gave it – many long days, forever and ever.
PSA 21:5 Great is his glory because of your help, honour and majesty you lay upon him.
PSA 21:6 For you make him most blessed forever, you make him glad with the joy of your presence.
PSA 21:7 For the king puts always his trust in the Lord; the Most High, in his love, will preserve him unshaken.
PSA 21:8 Your hand will reach all your foes, your right hand, all who hate you.
PSA 21:9 You will make them like a furnace of fire, when you appear, Lord. The Lord will swallow them up in his wrath. The fire will devour them.
PSA 21:10 You will sweep their offspring from the earth, their children from humanity.
PSA 21:11 When they scheme against you and hatch evil plots – they will fail.
PSA 21:12 For you aim your bow at their faces, make them turn in flight.
PSA 21:13 Be exalted, Lord, in your strength, to your might we shall sing and make music.
PSA 22:1 For the leader; set to “Deer of the Dawn”. A psalm of David. My God, my God, why have you left me, my rescue so far from the words of my roaring?
PSA 22:2 I cry in the day, you do not answer, I cry in the night but find no rest.
PSA 22:3 You are the Holy One, throned on the praises of Israel.
PSA 22:4 In you our ancestors trusted, they trusted and you delivered them.
PSA 22:5 They cried to you, and found safety, in you did they trust and were not put to shame.
PSA 22:6 But I am a worm, not a person; insulted by others, despised by the people.
PSA 22:7 All who see me mock me, with mouths wide open and wagging heads:
PSA 22:8 ‘He relies on the Lord; let him save him. Let him rescue the one he holds dear!’
PSA 22:9 But you drew me from the womb, laid me safely on my mother’s breasts.
PSA 22:10 On your care was I cast from my very birth, you are my God from my mother’s womb.
PSA 22:11 Be not far from me, for trouble is nigh, and there is none to help.
PSA 22:12 I am circled by many bulls, beset by the mighty of Bashan,
PSA 22:13 who face me with gaping jaws, like ravening roaring lions.
PSA 22:14 Poured out am I like water, and all my bones are loosened. My heart is become like wax, melted within me.
PSA 22:15 My palate is dry as a sherd, my tongue sticks to my jaws; in the dust of death you lay me.
PSA 22:16 For dogs are round about me, a band of knaves encircles me, gnawing my hands and my feet.
PSA 22:17 I can count my bones, every one. As for them, they feast their eyes on me.
PSA 22:18 They divide my garments among them, and over my raiment cast lots.
PSA 22:19 But you, O Lord, be not far, O my strength, hasten to help me.
PSA 22:20 Deliver my life from the sword my life from the power of the dogs.
PSA 22:21 Save me from the jaws of the lion, from the horns of the wild oxen help me.
PSA 22:22 I will tell of your fame to my kindred, and in the assembly will praise you.
PSA 22:23 Praise the Lord, you who fear him. All Jacob’s seed, give him glory. All Israel’s seed, stand in awe of him.
PSA 22:24 For he has not despised nor abhorred the sorrow of the sorrowful. He hid not his face from me, but he listened to my cry for help.
PSA 22:25 Of you is my praise in the great congregation; my vows I will pay before those who fear him.
PSA 22:26 The afflicted will eat to their heart’s desire, and those who seek after the Lord will praise him. Lift up your hearts forever.
PSA 22:27 All will call it to mind, to the ends of the earth, and turn to the Lord; and all tribes of the nations will bow down before you.
PSA 22:28 For the kingdom belongs to the Lord: he is the Lord of the nations.
PSA 22:29 To him will bow down all who sleep in the earth, and before him bend all who go down to the dust, and those who could not preserve their lives.
PSA 22:30 My descendants will tell of the Lord to the next generation;
PSA 22:31 they will declare his righteousness to people yet to be born: He has done it.
PSA 23:1 A psalm of David. The Lord is my shepherd: I am never in need.
PSA 23:2 He lays me down in green pastures. He gently leads me to waters of rest,
PSA 23:3 he refreshes my life. He guides me along paths that are straight, true to his name.
PSA 23:4 And when my way lies through a valley of gloom, I fear no evil, for you are with me. Your rod and your staff comfort me.
PSA 23:5 You spread a table for me in face of my foes; with oil you anoint my head, and my cup runs over.
PSA 23:6 Surely goodness and love will pursue me – all the days of my life. In the house of the Lord I will live through the length of the days.
PSA 24:1 Of David. A psalm. The earth is the Lord’s and all that it holds, the world and those who live in it.
PSA 24:2 For he founded it on the seas, and on the floods he sustains it.
PSA 24:3 Who may ascend the hill of the Lord? Who may stand in his holy place?
PSA 24:4 The clean of hands, the pure of heart, who sets not their heart upon sinful things, nor swears with intent to deceive:
PSA 24:5 they win from the Lord a blessing: God is their champion and saviour.
PSA 24:6 Such must be those who resort to him, and seek the face of the God of Jacob. Selah
PSA 24:7 Lift high your heads, you gates – Higher, you ancient doors; welcome the glorious king.
PSA 24:8 ‘Who is the glorious king?’ ‘The Lord strong and heroic, the Lord heroic in battle.’
PSA 24:9 Lift high your heads, you gates – Higher, you ancient doors; welcome the glorious king.
PSA 24:10 ‘Who is the glorious king?’ ‘The Lord, the God of hosts, he is the glorious king.’ Selah
PSA 25:1 A psalm of David. To you, O Lord, I lift up my heart: all the day I wait for you.
PSA 25:2 In you I trust, put me not to shame; let not my foes exult over me.
PSA 25:3 None will be shamed who wait for you, but shame will fall upon wanton traitors.
PSA 25:4 Make me, O Lord, to know your ways: teach me your paths.
PSA 25:5 In your faithfulness guide me and teach me, for you are my God and my saviour.
PSA 25:6 Remember your pity, O Lord, and your kindness, for they have been ever of old.
PSA 25:7 Do not remember the sins of my youth; remember me in kindness, because of your goodness, Lord.
PSA 25:8 Good is the Lord and upright, so he teaches sinners the way.
PSA 25:9 The humble he guides in the right, he teaches the humble his way.
PSA 25:10 All his ways are loving and loyal to those who observe his charges and covenant.
PSA 25:11 Be true to your name Lord, forgive my many sins.
PSA 25:12 Who then is the person who fears the Lord? He will teach them the way to choose.
PSA 25:13 They will live in prosperity, their children will inherit the land.
PSA 25:14 The Lord gives guidance to those who fear him, and with his covenant he makes them acquainted.
PSA 25:15 My eyes are ever toward the Lord, for out of the net he brings my foot.
PSA 25:16 Turn to me with your favour, for I am lonely and crushed
PSA 25:17 In my heart are strain and storm; bring me out of my distresses.
PSA 25:18 Look on my misery and trouble, and pardon all my sins,
PSA 25:19 look on my foes oh, so many! And their cruel hatred towards me.
PSA 25:20 Deliver me, keep me, and shame not one who takes refuge in you.
PSA 25:21 May integrity and innocence preserve me, for I wait for you, O Lord.
PSA 25:22 Redeem Israel, O God, from all its distresses.
PSA 26:1 A psalm of David. Defend me, O Lord, for my walk has been blameless; in the Lord have I trusted unswervingly:
PSA 26:2 Examine me, Lord, and test me; test my heart and my mind.
PSA 26:3 For your love is before my eyes, and your faithfulness governs my way.
PSA 26:4 I never sat down with the worthless, nor companied with dissemblers.
PSA 26:5 I hate the assembly of knaves, I would never sit down with the wicked;
PSA 26:6 but, with hands washed in innocence, I would march round your altar, O Lord,
PSA 26:7 singing loud songs of thanks, and telling of all your wonders.
PSA 26:8 O Lord, I love your house, the place where your glory lives.
PSA 26:9 Do not gather me up with sinners; slay me not with people of blood,
PSA 26:10 whose hands are stained with villainy, and whose right hand is filled with bribes.
PSA 26:11 But my walk is blameless! O redeem me, be gracious to me.
PSA 26:12 My foot stands on even ground, in the choirs I will bless the Lord.
PSA 27:1 A psalm of David. The Lord is my light and my saviour; whom then should I fear? The Lord protects my life; whom then should I dread?
PSA 27:2 When the wicked drew near to assail me and eat up my flesh, it was those who distressed and opposed me who stumbled and fell.
PSA 27:3 Though against me a host should encamp, yet my heart would be fearless: though battle should rise up against me, still would I be trustful.
PSA 27:4 One thing have I asked of the Lord, and that do I long for – To live in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to gaze on the grace of the Lord and inquire in his temple.
PSA 27:5 For he will hide me in his shelter in the day of misfortune. In his sheltering tent he hides me: he lifts me up on a rock.
PSA 27:6 And now that my head he has lifted above my encircling foes, I will march round the altar and sacrifice, shouting with joy, in his tent, making music and song to the Lord.
PSA 27:7 Hear, O Lord, my loud cry, and graciously answer me.
PSA 27:8 My heart has said to you, ‘Your face, O Lord, I seek.’
PSA 27:9 Hide not your face from me, reject not your servant in anger: for you have been my help. Abandon me not, nor forsake me, O God of my help:
PSA 27:10 for father and mother have left me; but the Lord will take me up.
PSA 27:11 Teach me your way, O Lord: lead me in an even path, because of my enemies.
PSA 27:12 Give me not up, O Lord, unto the rage of my foes; for against me have risen false witnesses, breathing out cruelty.
PSA 27:13 Firm is the faith I cherish, that I, in the land of the living, will yet see the goodness of God.
PSA 27:14 Let your heart be courageous and strong, and wait on the Lord.
PSA 28:1 Of David. Unto you, O Lord, do I cry; my rock, be not deaf to me: lest, through holding your peace, I become like those who go down to the pit.
PSA 28:2 Hear my loud entreaty, as I cry for help to you, lifting my hands, O Lord, towards your holy chancel.
PSA 28:3 Take me not off with the wicked, nor with the workers of wrong, whose speech to their neighbours is friendly, while evil is in their heart.
PSA 28:4 Give them as they have done, as their wicked deeds deserve. As their hands have wrought, so give to them: requite to them their deserts.
PSA 28:5 They are blind to all that the Lord does, to all that his hands have wrought; and so he will tear them down, to build them up no more.
PSA 28:6 Blest be the Lord, who has heard my voice as I plead for mercy.
PSA 28:7 The Lord is my strength and my shield; my heart trusts in him. I was helped: so my heart is exultant, and in my song I will praise him.
PSA 28:8 The Lord is the strength of his people, the fortress who saves his anointed.
PSA 28:9 O save your people, and bless your inheritance. Be their shepherd and carry them forever.
PSA 29:1 A psalm of David. Ascribe to the Lord, you heavenly beings, ascribe to the Lord glory and power
PSA 29:2 Ascribe to the Lord the glory he manifests: bow to the Lord in holy array.
PSA 29:3 The Lord’s voice peals on the waters. The God of glory has thundered. He peals o’er the mighty waters.
PSA 29:4 The Lord’s voice sounds with strength, the Lord’s voice sounds with majesty.
PSA 29:5 The Lord’s voice breaks the cedars, he breaks the cedars of Lebanon,
PSA 29:6 making Lebanon dance like a calf, Sirion like a young wild ox.
PSA 29:7 The Lord’s voice hews out flames of fire.
PSA 29:8 The Lord’s voice rends the desert, he rends the desert of Kadesh.
PSA 29:9 The Lord’s voice whirls the oaks, and strips the forests bare; and all in his temple say ‘Glory.’
PSA 29:10 The Lord was king at the flood, the Lord sits throned forever.
PSA 29:11 The Lord gives strength to his people, he blesses his people with peace.
PSA 30:1 A psalm of David. A song for the dedication of the Temple. I will extol you, O Lord, because you have lifted me up, and not suffered my foes to rejoice over me.
PSA 30:2 I cried to you for help, O Lord my God, and you healed me.
PSA 30:3 You have brought me up, Lord, from Sheol, from my way to the pit back to life you have called me.
PSA 30:4 Sing praise to the Lord, faithful people; give thanks to his holy name.
PSA 30:5 For his anger lasts only a moment, his favour endures for a lifetime. Weeping may lodge for the night, but the morning brings shouts of joy.
PSA 30:6 When all went well, I imagined that never should I be shaken.
PSA 30:7 For by your favour, O Lord, you had set me on mountains strong: but you hide your face, and I was confounded.
PSA 30:8 Then to you, Lord, I cried, to the Lord I begged for mercy,
PSA 30:9 ‘What profit is there in my blood, if I go down to the pit? Can you be praised by dust? Can it tell of your faithfulness?
PSA 30:10 Hear, Lord, and show me your favour, Lord be a helper to me.’
PSA 30:11 You have turned my mourning to dancing; my sackcloth you have unloosed, and clothed me with joy:
PSA 30:12 that unceasingly I should sing your praise, and give thanks to you, Lord my God, forever.
PSA 31:1 For the leader. A psalm of David. In you, O Lord, I take refuge; let me never be put to shame. Rescue me in your faithfulness;
PSA 31:2 incline to me your ear. Deliver me speedily. Be to me a rock of defence, a fortified house, to save me.
PSA 31:3 For my rock and my fortress are you; lead me and guide me so your name will be honoured.
PSA 31:4 Draw me out of the net they have hid for me, for you yourself are my refuge.
PSA 31:5 Into your hand I commend my spirit: you ransom me, Lord, faithful God.
PSA 31:6 I hate those devoted to worthless idols; I trust in the Lord.
PSA 31:7 I will rejoice and be glad in your love, because you have looked on my misery, and cared for me in my distress.
PSA 31:8 You have not given me into the enemy’s hand, you have set my feet in a spacious place.
PSA 31:9 Be gracious to me, Lord, for I am distressed; my eye is wasted away with sorrow.
PSA 31:10 For my life is consumed with grief, and my years with sighing. My strength is broken with misery, my bones waste away.
PSA 31:11 The scorn of all my foes, the butt of my neighbours am I, a terror to my acquaintance. At the sight of me in the street people turn quickly away.
PSA 31:12 I am clean forgotten like the dead, am become like a ruined vessel.
PSA 31:13 I hear the whispers of many – terror on every side – scheming together against me, plotting to take my life.
PSA 31:14 But my trust is in you, Lord. ‘You are my God,’ I say;
PSA 31:15 my times are in your hand, save me from the hand of the foes who pursue me.
PSA 31:16 Make your face to shine on your servant, save me in your love.
PSA 31:17 Put me not, O Lord, to shame, for I have called upon you. Let the wicked be put to shame silent in Sheol.
PSA 31:18 Strike the false lips dumb, that speak proudly against the righteous with haughtiness and contempt.
PSA 31:19 How great is the goodness you have treasured for those who fear you, and wrought for those who take refuge in you, in plain sight of all!
PSA 31:20 In your sheltering wings you hide them from plottings of people, you keep them safe in a bower from the chiding of tongues.
PSA 31:21 Blest be the Lord for the wonderful love he has shown me in time of distress.
PSA 31:22 For I had said in panic, ‘I am driven clean out of your sight.’ But you heard my plea, when I cried to you for help.
PSA 31:23 Love the Lord, all you faithful; the Lord protects the loyal, but repays the haughty in full.
PSA 31:24 Let your hearts be courageous and strong, all you who wait on the Lord.
PSA 32:1 Of David. A maskil. Happy those whose transgression is pardoned, whose sin is covered.
PSA 32:2 Happy are those, free from falseness of spirit, to whom the Lord reckons no debt of guilt.
PSA 32:3 When I held my peace, my bones wore away with my endless groaning;
PSA 32:4 for day and night did your hand lie heavy upon me. The sap of my life was dried up as with fierce summer-heat. Selah
PSA 32:5 I began to acknowledge my sin, not concealing my guilt; and the moment I vowed to confess to the Lord my transgression, then you yourself did pardon the guilt of my sin. Selah
PSA 32:6 For this cause let all who are faithful pray to you in the time of distress; then, when the great waters rush, they will not reach to him.
PSA 32:7 For you are my shelter, you protect me from trouble, and surround me with deliverance. Selah
PSA 32:8 ‘With my eye steadfastly upon you, I will instruct and teach you The way you should go.
PSA 32:9 Do not be like the horse or the mule, that have no understanding, but need bridle and halter to curb them, else they will not come near to you.’
PSA 32:10 The godless have many sorrows, but those who trust in the Lord will be compassed about by his kindness.
PSA 32:11 Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, you righteous; and ring out your joy, all you upright in heart.
PSA 33:1 Shout for joy in the Lord, you righteous: praise for the upright is seemly.
PSA 33:2 Give thanks to the Lord on the lyre, play to him on a ten-stringed harp.
PSA 33:3 Sing to him a new song, play skilfully and shout merrily.
PSA 33:4 For the Lord is straight in his promise; and all that he does is in faithfulness.
PSA 33:5 Justice and right he loves; the earth is full of his kindness.
PSA 33:6 By his word the heavens were made, all their host by the breath of his mouth.
PSA 33:7 He gathers the sea in a bottle, the ocean he puts into store-houses.
PSA 33:8 Let the whole world honour the Lord, let all who live on earth be in awe.
PSA 33:9 For at his word it came into being, at his command it stood forth.
PSA 33:10 The Lord frustrates the designs of the nations, what the peoples have purposed, he brings to nought,
PSA 33:11 but the Lord’s own design will stand forever, and what his heart has purposed, through all generations.
PSA 33:12 Happy the nation whose God is the Lord, the people he chose for himself as his own.
PSA 33:13 The Lord looks down from heaven, he sees all of humanity;
PSA 33:14 from where he rules he gazes on all who inhabit the earth.
PSA 33:15 He fashions the hearts of them all, and gives heed to all that they do.
PSA 33:16 It is not by great armies that kings are victorious, it is not by great strength that a warrior saves himself;
PSA 33:17 false hope is the war-horse to usher in victory, for all its great might it can provide no escape.
PSA 33:18 See! The eye of the Lord is on those who fear him, on those who hope in his kindness;
PSA 33:19 to deliver their life from death, and to keep them alive in famine.
PSA 33:20 We wait for the Lord: he is our help and our shield.
PSA 33:21 For in him our heart is glad, we trust in his holy name.
PSA 33:22 Let your kindness, O Lord, be upon us, as is our hope in you.
PSA 34:1 Of David, when he feigned madness in the presence of Abimelech, who drove him away, and he left. I will bless the Lord at all times, in my mouth will his praise be forever.
PSA 34:2 In the Lord will my heart make her boast, the humble will hear and be glad.
PSA 34:3 O magnify the Lord with me and let us extol his name together.
PSA 34:4 I sought the Lord, and, in answer, he saved me from all my terrors.
PSA 34:5 Look to him and you will be radiant, with faces unashamed.
PSA 34:6 Here is one who was crushed, but cried and was heard by the Lord, and brought safe out of every trouble.
PSA 34:7 The Lord’s angel encamps about those who fear him, and rescues them.
PSA 34:8 O taste and see that the Lord is good, happy those who take refuge in him.
PSA 34:9 Fear the Lord, all his people, for they who fear him lack nothing.
PSA 34:10 Even young lions may be poor and hungry, but those who seek the Lord will not lack any good thing.
PSA 34:11 Come, children, listen to me. I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
PSA 34:12 Which of you is desirous of life, loves many and happy days?
PSA 34:13 Then guard your tongue from evil, and your lips from speaking deceit.
PSA 34:14 Depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.
PSA 34:15 The eyes of the Lord are towards the righteous, his ears are towards their cry for help.
PSA 34:16 The Lord sets his face against those who do evil, to root their memory out of the earth.
PSA 34:17 When righteous cry, they are heard by the Lord, and he saves them from all their distresses.
PSA 34:18 The Lord is near to the broken-hearted, he helps those whose spirit is crushed.
PSA 34:19 Many misfortunes befall the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of them all.
PSA 34:20 He guards all their bones, none are broken.
PSA 34:21 Misfortune will slay the ungodly; those who hate the righteous are doomed.
PSA 34:22 The Lord ransoms the life of his servants, and none will be doomed who takes refuge in him.
PSA 35:1 Of David. Contend, Lord, with those who contend with me, do battle with those who do battle with me.
PSA 35:2 Grasp shield and buckler, and rise up as my help.
PSA 35:3 Draw spear and battle-axe, confront those who pursue me. Assure me that you will help me.
PSA 35:4 Dishonour and shame be on those who are seeking my life! Defeat and confusion on those who are planning my hurt!
PSA 35:5 As chaff before wind may they be, with the Lord’s angel pursuing them.
PSA 35:6 Slippery and dark be their way, with his angel thrusting them on.
PSA 35:7 For they wantonly hid their net for me, and dug a pit to destroy me.
PSA 35:8 Upon them may ruin come unawares; may the net which they hid catch themselves, and into the pit may they fall.
PSA 35:9 Then I will exult in the Lord, and be joyful because of his help;
PSA 35:10 and all my being will say, ‘Who, O Lord, is like you, who save the helpless from those too strong for them, the poor and the helpless from those who despoil them?’
PSA 35:11 Violent witnesses rise, and ask of me things that I know not.
PSA 35:12 Evil for good they requite me, leaving me inwardly comfortless.
PSA 35:13 But when they were sick, I put on sackcloth, and chastened myself with fasting. I prayed with head bowed low,
PSA 35:14 as if for my friend or my brother. I went about bowed and in mourning, as one who laments his mother.
PSA 35:15 When I stumbled, they gleefully gathered, strangers gathered around me, and tore at me without ceasing,
PSA 35:16 impiously mocking and mocking, bearing their teeth at me.
PSA 35:17 How long, Lord, will you look on? Rescue me from their roaring, my precious life from the lions.
PSA 35:18 I will then give you thanks in the great congregation, and praise you before many people.
PSA 35:19 Suffer not those to rejoice over me who are falsely my foes, suffer not those who without cause abhor me to wink with the eye.
PSA 35:20 For it is not peace that they speak of those who are quiet in the land; but treacherous charges they plot.
PSA 35:21 With wide open mouths they shout, ‘Hurrah! Hurrah! With our own eyes we saw it.’
PSA 35:22 But you have seen, too, O Lord, keep not silence, O Lord, be not far from me.
PSA 35:23 Bestir you, awake, for my right my God, my Lord, for my cause.
PSA 35:24 You are just, Lord: win for me justice, let them not rejoice over me,
PSA 35:25 inwardly saying, ‘Hurrah! The desire of our hearts at last! Now we have swallowed him up.’
PSA 35:26 Shame and confusion together on those who rejoice at my hurt! Clothed with shame and dishonour be those who are haughty to me!
PSA 35:27 Let such as delight in my cause ring out their gladness, and say evermore, ‘Great is the Lord whose delight is the well-being of his servant.’
PSA 35:28 Then my tongue will tell of your justice, and all the day long of your praise.
PSA 36:1 For the leader. Of the servant of the Lord, of David. Sin whispers within the heart of the wicked, who have no dread of God before their eyes.
PSA 36:2 It flatters them in their eyes that their sin will not be found out.
PSA 36:3 First, their speech becomes wicked and false, they give up acting wisely and well.
PSA 36:4 Then they plot deliberate wrong, take their stand on the wicked way, without the least shrinking from evil.
PSA 36:5 Your love, O Lord, touches the heavens, your faithfulness reaches the clouds.
PSA 36:6 Your justice is like the great mountains, your judgments are like the broad sea. Lord, you save people and animals.
PSA 36:7 How precious your love, O God! All may seek shelter in the shadow of your wings.
PSA 36:8 They feast on the fat of your house, they drink of your brook of delights.
PSA 36:9 For with you is the fountain of life, in the light that is yours we see light.
PSA 36:10 O continue your grace to the faithful, your love to the upright in heart.
PSA 36:11 Let no arrogant foot tread upon me, no wicked hand drive me to exile.
PSA 36:12 There the workers of wrong lie prostrate, thrust down to rise up no more.
PSA 37:1 Of David. Be not kindled to wrath at the wicked, nor envious of those who work wrong;
PSA 37:2 for, like grass, they will speedily wither, and fade like the green of young grass.
PSA 37:3 Trust in the Lord, and do good; remain in the land, and deal faithfully:
PSA 37:4 then the Lord will be your delight, he will grant you your heart’s petitions.
PSA 37:5 Commit your way to the Lord; trust in him, and he will act,
PSA 37:6 making clear as the light your right, and your just cause clear as the noon-day.
PSA 37:7 In silence and patience wait on the Lord. Be not kindled to anger at those who prosper. At those who execute evil devices.
PSA 37:8 Desist from anger, abandon wrath: be not kindled to anger it leads but to evil:
PSA 37:9 for evildoers will be cut off, but the land will be theirs, who wait on the Lord.
PSA 37:10 Yet but a little, and the wicked vanish: look at their place: they are there no more.
PSA 37:11 But the humble will have the land, and the rapture of peace in abundance.
PSA 37:12 The wicked plots against the righteous, snarls like a wild animal;
PSA 37:13 the Lord laughs, for he sees that his day is coming.
PSA 37:14 The wicked have drawn the sword, and bent the bow, to fell the poor, to slay those who walk uprightly;
PSA 37:15 but their sword will pierce their own heart, and their bows will be broken in pieces.
PSA 37:16 Better is the righteous person’s little than the wealth of many wicked.
PSA 37:17 For the arms of the wicked will be broken, but the Lord upholds the righteous.
PSA 37:18 The Lord watches over the days of the blameless, their heritage will continue forever.
PSA 37:19 They will not be shamed in the evil time, in the days of famine they will be satisfied.
PSA 37:20 Because the wicked will perish: but the foes of the Lord, like a brand in the oven, will vanish, like smoke they will vanish.
PSA 37:21 The wicked must borrow and cannot pay back, but the righteous is lavish and gives.
PSA 37:22 For those blest by the Lord inherit the land, while those whom he curses will be cut off.
PSA 37:23 The Lord supports the steps of those with whom he is pleased.
PSA 37:24 Though they fall, they will not be cast headlong, for the Lord holds their hands.
PSA 37:25 Never, from youth to age, have I seen the righteous forsaken, or their children begging bread.
PSA 37:26 They are ever lavishly lending, and their children are fountains of blessing.
PSA 37:27 Turn away from evil and do good and you will live in the land forever.
PSA 37:28 For the Lord loves justice, he does not forsake his friends. The unrighteous will be destroyed forever, and the seed of the wicked will be cut off.
PSA 37:29 But the land will belong to the righteous, they will live upon it forever,
PSA 37:30 The mouth of the righteous murmurs wisdom, and words of justice are on their tongues.
PSA 37:31 The law of their God is in their heart, their steps are never unsteady.
PSA 37:32 The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to put them to death.
PSA 37:33 But the Lord leaves them not in their hand: at their trial they will not be held guilty.
PSA 37:34 Wait on the Lord, and observe his way: he will lift you to honour the land will be yours, you will feast your eyes on the doom of the wicked.
PSA 37:35 I have seen the wicked exultant, lifting themselves like a cedar of Lebanon.
PSA 37:36 But the moment I passed, they vanished! I sought for them, but they could not be found.
PSA 37:37 Preserve your honour and practise uprightness, for such a person fares well in the end.
PSA 37:38 But transgressors will perish together. Cut off are the wicked forever.
PSA 37:39 The righteous are saved by the Lord, who in time of distress is their refuge:
PSA 37:40 the Lord helps and rescue them, from the wicked he rescues and saves them, because they take refuge in him.
PSA 38:1 A Psalm of David. A lament. Reprove me not, Lord, in your anger, and chasten me not in your wrath;
PSA 38:2 for your arrows have sunk into me, and your hand lies heavy upon me.
PSA 38:3 In my flesh is no soundness because of your anger, no health in my bones, because of my sin.
PSA 38:4 For that my guilt is gone over my head: it weighs like a burden too heavy for me.
PSA 38:5 My wounds stink and fester, for my foolishness I am tormented.
PSA 38:6 Bent and bowed am I utterly, all the day going in mourning.
PSA 38:7 My loins are filled with burning, and in my flesh is no soundness.
PSA 38:8 I am utterly crushed and numb; I cry louder than lion roars.
PSA 38:9 Lord, you know all that I long for, my groans are not hidden from you.
PSA 38:10 My heart is throbbing, my strength has failed me. The light of my eyes – even it is gone from me.
PSA 38:11 My dear ones and friends keep aloof, and my neighbours stand afar off.
PSA 38:12 They who aim at my life lay their snares, they who seek my hurt speak of ruin, nursing treachery all the day long.
PSA 38:13 But I turn a deaf ear and hear not; like the dumb I open not my mouth.
PSA 38:14 I am like one without hearing, with no arguments in my mouth.
PSA 38:15 For my hope, O Lord, is in you. You will answer, O Lord my God,
PSA 38:16 when I utter the hope that those who made scorn of my tottering feet may not rejoice over me.
PSA 38:17 For I am ready to fall, my pain forsakes me never.
PSA 38:18 I acknowledge my guilt, I am anxious because of my sin:
PSA 38:19 My wanton assailants are strong, those who wrongfully hate me are many,
PSA 38:20 who render me evil for good, and oppose me, because I make good my goal.
PSA 38:21 Do not forsake me, O Lord; my God, be not far from me.
PSA 38:22 Hasten to help me, O Lord my saviour.
PSA 39:1 For the leader; for Jeduthun. A psalm of David. I vowed to watch my words, and sin not with my tongue, but to put on my mouth a muzzle, while the wicked were in my presence.
PSA 39:2 I was silent and dumb, speechless: but my pain was stirred up.
PSA 39:3 My heart grew hot within me; as I mused, the fire was kindled, till at last the words came to my tongue.
PSA 39:4 ‘Teach me, O Lord, my end, and the sum of my days what it is. Let me know how transient I am.
PSA 39:5 See! My days you have made but a span, and my life is as nothing before you. It is but as a breath that everyone stands: Selah
PSA 39:6 it is but in mere semblance we walk to and fro, and all our noise is for nothing. We heap up, and know not who will gather.’
PSA 39:7 And now, what wait I for, Lord? My hope is in you.
PSA 39:8 From all my transgressions deliver me; make me not the scorn of the fool.
PSA 39:9 I am dumb, never opening my mouth, for this is your own doing.
PSA 39:10 Remove your stroke from off me: by the might of your hand I am spent.
PSA 39:11 When you rebuke someone to punish their sins, you consume, like a moth, what they treasures. Everyone is only a breath. Selah
PSA 39:12 Hear my prayer, O Lord; attend to my cry for help. Hold not your peace at my tears. For I am but a guest of yours, a stranger visiting, like all my ancestors.
PSA 39:13 Look away from me, let me smile again, before I die and am gone.
PSA 40:1 For the leader. A psalm of David. For the Lord I waited and waited, till, inclining to me, he heard my cry.
PSA 40:2 From the horrible pit he drew me, up out of the miry clay; he set my feet on a rock, and my steps he made firm.
PSA 40:3 He put a new song in my mouth, of praise to our God. Many see it, and, filled with awe, put their trust in the Lord.
PSA 40:4 Happy the person who has put in the Lord their trust, not looking to false gods or turning to idols.
PSA 40:5 With us you have wrought in rich measure, O Lord our God, your marvels and purposes for us – none may compare with you – were I to declare or to tell them, past counting are they.
PSA 40:6 In offerings bloody or bloodless you have no delight, but with open ears you have made me. Burnt-offering and offering for sin are not what you ask.
PSA 40:7 Then said I, ‘Here I am, as the roll of the book has enjoined.
PSA 40:8 My delight, O God, is to do your will, and your law is within my heart.’
PSA 40:9 Well, O Lord, you know that, with lips unrestrained, your righteousness I told in the great congregation,
PSA 40:10 not hiding it in my heart. I have told of your steadfast help, from the great congregation I hid not your love and your faithfulness.
PSA 40:11 So do not restrain, Lord, your pity from us. Your love and your faithfulness – ever may they be our shield.
PSA 40:12 For evils that cannot be numbered have compassed me round. My transgressions have followed me up – I can bear it no more. They are more than the hairs of my head, and my heart has forsaken me.
PSA 40:13 O Lord, be pleased to deliver me, haste to my help, O Lord.
PSA 40:14 May those who are seeking my life be ashamed and confounded together; may those who delight in my hurt be defeated and brought to dishonour.
PSA 40:15 May those who hurrah over me be dumbfounded because of their shame.
PSA 40:16 But may all who seek after you rejoice and be glad in you. May all those eager for your aid, say, ‘Great is the Lord’ evermore.
PSA 40:17 I am weak and needy, yet the Lord cares for me. You are my help and deliverer; don’t delay, my God.
PSA 41:1 For the leader; for Jeduthun. A psalm of David. Happy are those who consider the weak; in the day of misfortune the Lord will deliver them.
PSA 41:2 He will keep them safe, happy, and long in the land, and not give them up to the rage of their foes.
PSA 41:3 The Lord will sustain them on bed of languishing; tending their sickness, as long as they lie.
PSA 41:4 For this cause I say, ‘Lord, show me your favour; heal me, because I have sinned against you.’
PSA 41:5 My enemies speak of me nothing but evil, ‘When will he die, and his name pass away?’
PSA 41:6 When one comes to see me, their words ring hollow; their heart keeps gathering mischief the while; and when they go out, they give it speech.
PSA 41:7 In secret they whisper together against me, all those who hate me plot evil against me.
PSA 41:8 ‘Some fatal disease has fastened upon him; and now that he lies, he will rise up no more.’
PSA 41:9 My most trusted friend, on whom I relied, who ate of my bread, has turned against me.
PSA 41:10 But do you, Lord, graciously raise me up, that I may pay them their due reward.
PSA 41:11 By this will I know you delight in me: if my foes may not shout over me in triumph.
PSA 41:12 For my innocence you uphold me, and set me forever before your face.
PSA 41:13 Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting, Amen and Amen.
PSA 42:1 For the leader. A maskil of the Korahites. Like the hart which longs for brooks of water, I long for you, God.
PSA 42:2 I thirst for God, for my living God. When shall I enter in, and see the face of God?
PSA 42:3 My tears have been my food by day and by night; for they say to me all the day long, ‘Where is your God?’
PSA 42:4 My heart floods with sorrow, as I call to mind: how I used to pass on with the throng, at their head, to the house of God, with glad shouts and giving of thanks, in the throng who kept festival.
PSA 42:5 Why am I downcast? Why this moaning within me? Hope in God; for yet will I praise him, my help, my God.
PSA 42:6 I am sunk in my misery; I will therefore call you to mind from the land of Jordan and Hermon, the mountain Mizar.
PSA 42:7 Flood is calling to flood at the noise of your cataracts; all your waves and your breakers have passed over me.
PSA 42:8 In the day I cry to the Lord to summon his kindness; and the song that I sing in the night is a prayer to the living God.
PSA 42:9 I say to God my rock, ‘Why have you forgotten me? Why must I walk so sadly, so hard pressed by the foe?’
PSA 42:10 It pierces me to the heart to hear the enemy’s taunts, as all the day long they say to me, ‘Where is your God?’
PSA 42:11 Why am I downcast? Why this moaning within me? Hope in God; for yet will I praise him, my help, my God.
PSA 43:1 Right me, defend my cause against a pitiless people. From the crafty and crooked, O God, deliver me.
PSA 43:2 For you are God my protector: why have you cast me off? Why must I walk so sadly, so hard pressed by the foe?
PSA 43:3 Send forth your light and your truth, let them be my guides: to your holy hill let them bring me, to the place where you live.
PSA 43:4 Then will I go to God’s altar, to God my rejoicing; and with joy on the lyre I will praise you, O God, my God.
PSA 43:5 Why am I downcast? Why this moaning within me? Hope in God; for yet will I praise him, my help, my God.
PSA 44:1 For the leader. Of the Korahites. A maskil. O God, we have heard with our ears, all our ancestors have told us of the work that you wrought in their day, your wonders in days of old,
PSA 44:2 uprooting and crushing the nations, then planting and settling them. For it wasn’t their own sword that won them the land,
PSA 44:3 it was not their own arm that brought them the victory. Yours was the hand and the arm, yours was the face that shone on them with favour.
PSA 44:4 It was you, my king and my God, that ordained the victories of Jacob.
PSA 44:5 Through you we can thrust back our foes, and by your name tread down our assailants:
PSA 44:6 for not in my bow do I trust, nor can my sword win me the victory.
PSA 44:7 Our victory comes from you, and confusion to those who hate us.
PSA 44:8 In God we boast all the day long, and your name will we praise forever. Selah
PSA 44:9 Yet you have spurned and disgraced us, in not going forth with our armies,
PSA 44:10 and in making us flee from the foe, so that those who hated us plundered us.
PSA 44:11 You have let us be eaten like sheep, you have scattered us over the world,
PSA 44:12 sold your people for a pittance, and getting no gain from their price.
PSA 44:13 You have made us the butt of our neighbours, the derision and scorn of all round us.
PSA 44:14 O’er the world you have made us a byword, the nations at us shake their heads.
PSA 44:15 My disgrace is forever before me, my face is covered with shame,
PSA 44:16 at the words of blasphemer and scoffer, at the sight of the foe and the vengeful.
PSA 44:17 All this has come upon us, yet we have not forgotten you nor falsely dealt with your covenant.
PSA 44:18 Our heart has not turned back, nor our steps declined from your way,
PSA 44:19 that you thus should have crushed us down, and covered us over with gloom, in the place where the jackals roam.
PSA 44:20 Had we forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a god that was strange,
PSA 44:21 would God not have searched this out? For he knows the heart and its secrets.
PSA 44:22 But in your cause it is we are killed all the day, and counted as sheep for the slaughter.
PSA 44:23 Rouse yourself, why do you sleep Lord? Awake, cast us not off forever.
PSA 44:24 Why do you hide your face, forgetting our stress and our misery?
PSA 44:25 For we have sunk down to the dust, our bodies cling to the ground.
PSA 44:26 Arise, come to our help: for your love’s sake, ransom us.
PSA 45:1 For the leader; on shoshannim. Of the Korahites. A maskil. A love song. My heart is astir with beautiful words: I will sing a song, concerning the king, with tongue like the pen of a ready writer.
PSA 45:2 Your beauty is more than mortal, grace is shed over your lips: therefore God has blessed you forever.
PSA 45:3 Warrior, strap your sword on your thigh. What glory and splendour!
PSA 45:4 Good fortune attend you, as forth you ride in the cause of good faith, and as champion of justice. May your arm instruct you in deeds of dread.
PSA 45:5 Sharp are your arrows; nations fall under you: pierced to the heart are the foes of the king.
PSA 45:6 Your throne shall endure for ever and ever your royal sceptre a sceptre of equity.
PSA 45:7 Right you love and wrong you hate: therefore the Lord your God anoints you With oil of gladness above your fellows.
PSA 45:8 With myrrh, aloes, and cassia your robes are all fragrant, you are gladdened by music of ivory harps.
PSA 45:9 King’s daughters stand ready with jewels for you, at your right hand the queen in gold of Ophir.
PSA 45:10 Listen, daughter, and see; and incline your ear: forget your folk and your father’s house.
PSA 45:11 And when the king desires your beauty, bow to him, for he is your lord.
PSA 45:12 So shall the Tyrians come with gifts, and the richest of people will do you homage.
PSA 45:13 The king’s daughter is glorious altogether, with dress of pearls inwrought with gold.
PSA 45:14 In many-coloured robes she is led to the king, with the virgin companions she brought in her train.
PSA 45:15 The king’s palace they enter with joy and rejoicing.
PSA 45:16 May sons of yours take the place of your fathers, whom you will make princes in all the land.
PSA 45:17 Your name will I celebrate world without end, so that nations shall praise you for ever and ever.
PSA 46:1 For the leader. Of the Korahites, on alamoth. A song. God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.
PSA 46:2 So we have no fear, though earth should change, and the hills totter into the heart of the ocean.
PSA 46:3 Let its waters roar and foam, let the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. On our side is the Lord of hosts, our sure defence is the God of Jacob. Selah
PSA 46:4 A river there is, whose streams make glad God’s city, the home the Most High has hallowed.
PSA 46:5 God is within her: she cannot be shaken. God helps her at the turn of the morning.
PSA 46:6 Nations roared, kingdoms tottered: he uttered his voice, earth melted away.
PSA 46:7 On our side is the Lord of hosts, our sure defence is the God of Jacob.
PSA 46:8 Come and see what the Lord has done, working appallingly in the earth.
PSA 46:9 He stills wars to the ends of the earth – breaking the bow, snapping the spear, burning the chariots in the fire.
PSA 46:10 ‘Refrain; and know surely that I am God, high over the nations, high over the world.’
PSA 46:11 On our side is the Lord of Hosts, our sure defence is the God of Jacob. Selah
PSA 47:1 For the leader. Of the Korahites. A psalm. Clap your hands, all you peoples: shout to God in ringing cries.
PSA 47:2 For the Lord is most high and dread, a great king over all the earth.
PSA 47:3 He subdues the peoples under us, the nations under our feet;
PSA 47:4 he chooses our heritage for us, the glory of Jacob whom he loves. Selah
PSA 47:5 God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet.
PSA 47:6 Sing praise to our God, sing praises: sing praise to our king, sing praises.
PSA 47:7 For king of all earth is he: praise God in a skilful song.
PSA 47:8 God is king over all the nations, God sits on his holy throne.
PSA 47:9 Princes of nations gather with the people of Abraham’s God: for the shields of the earth are God’s; greatly exalted is he.
PSA 48:1 A song. A psalm of the Korahites. Great is the Lord and worthy all praise in the city of our God. His holy mountain,
PSA 48:2 that rises so fair, is the joy of all the world. Like the mount of the gods is Mount Zion, the city of the great king.
PSA 48:3 Once God made himself known as the defence of her palaces.
PSA 48:4 For see! A concert of kings passed over the frontier together.
PSA 48:5 But one glance, and they were astounded; they hastened away in dismay.
PSA 48:6 Trembling took hold of them there, like the pains of a woman in labour.
PSA 48:7 They were shattered, as east wind shatters the giant ships in pieces.
PSA 48:8 What we heard, we now have seen in the city of the Lord of hosts, the city of our God. God will uphold her forever. Selah
PSA 48:9 We think, O God, of your love, in the midst of your temple.
PSA 48:10 Your fame, O God, like your name, shall extend to the ends of the earth. Victory fills your hand.
PSA 48:11 Let mount Zion be glad; let the daughters of Judah rejoice because of your judgments.
PSA 48:12 Walk about Zion, go round her; count her towers.
PSA 48:13 Set your mind on her ramparts, consider her palaces; that you tell to the next generation
PSA 48:14 That such is God, our God he it is who shall guide us for ever and ever.
PSA 49:1 For the leader. Of the Korahites. A psalm. Hear this, you peoples all; attend, all you who live in the world
PSA 49:2 people of low degree and high, the rich and the poor together.
PSA 49:3 My mouth shall utter wisdom, the thoughts of a seeing heart.
PSA 49:4 I incline my ear to a proverb, on the lyre I will open my riddle.
PSA 49:5 Why should I be afraid in the days of misfortune, when circled by wicked and cunning foes,
PSA 49:6 who put their trust in their wealth, and boast of their boundless riches?
PSA 49:7 For assuredly no one can ransom themselves, or give to God the price of their life,
PSA 49:8 for the ransom of a life is costly, no payment is ever enough,
PSA 49:9 to keep them alive for ever and ever, so as never to see the pit at all.
PSA 49:10 But see it they will. Even wise people die, the fool and the brutish perish alike, and abandon their wealth to others.
PSA 49:11 The grave is their everlasting home, the place they shall live in for ever and ever, though after their own names they called whole lands.
PSA 49:12 Despite their wealth, they perish like dumb animals.
PSA 49:13 This is the fate of the confident fool, and the end of those who are pleased with their portion. Selah
PSA 49:14 Like sheep they descend to Sheol with Death for their shepherd; down they go straight to the grave, and their form wastes away in their home below.
PSA 49:15 But God will assuredly ransom my life from the hand of Sheol; for he will receive me. Selah
PSA 49:16 So be not afraid when someone grows rich, when the wealth of their house increases.
PSA 49:17 Not a shred of it all can they take when they die, wealth cannot follow them down.
PSA 49:18 Though they count themselves happy, when they are alive, and win praise from many for faring so well,
PSA 49:19 they must join their ancestors, who see the light nevermore.
PSA 49:20 The wealthy are without understanding, they perish like dumb animals.
PSA 50:1 A psalm of Asaph. The Lord God has spoken: He summons the earth from sunrise to sunset.
PSA 50:2 From Zion, perfection of beauty, God’s glory shines forth.
PSA 50:3 Our God comes, he cannot keep silence, devouring fire is before him, and furious tempest around him.
PSA 50:4 He summons the heavens above and the earth to judge his people.
PSA 50:5 Gather to him his saints by covenant-sacrifice bound to him;
PSA 50:6 that the heavens may declare his justice, for a God of justice is he. Selah
PSA 50:7 ‘Hear, O my people, and I will speak, and protest to you, O Israel: I am the Lord, your God.
PSA 50:8 Not for your sacrifices will I reprove you your burnt-offerings are ever before me
PSA 50:9 Not a bullock will I take from your house, nor male goats out of your folds;
PSA 50:10 for all beasts of the forest are mine, and the kine on a thousand hills.
PSA 50:11 I know all the birds of the air, all that moves on the fields is mine.
PSA 50:12 Were I hungry, I would not tell you, for the world and its fulness are mine.
PSA 50:13 Am I such as to eat bulls’ flesh, or drink the blood of goats?
PSA 50:14 Offer to God a thank-offering, pay the Most High your vows.
PSA 50:15 Summon me in the day of distress, I will rescue you, so will you honour me.’
PSA 50:16 But to the wicked God says: ‘What right have you to talk of my statutes, or take my covenant into your mouth
PSA 50:17 while you yourself hate correction, and cast my words behind you?
PSA 50:18 When you see a thief, you run with them; with adulterers you keep company.
PSA 50:19 You let your mouth loose for evil, your tongue contrives deceit.
PSA 50:20 You shamefully speak of your kin, and slander your own mother’s son.
PSA 50:21 And because I kept silence at this, you did take me for one like yourself. But I will convict you and show you plainly.
PSA 50:22 ‘Now you who forget God, mark this, lest I rend you, past hope of deliverance.
PSA 50:23 Those who bring a thank-offering honour me; but to those: who follows my way, I will show the salvation of God.’
PSA 51:1 For the leader. A psalm of David, when Nathan the prophet come to him after he had been with Bathsheba. In your kindness, O God, be gracious to me, in your own great pity blot out my transgressions.
PSA 51:2 Wash me clean of my guilt, make me pure of my sin.
PSA 51:3 For well I know my transgressions, my sin is ever before me.
PSA 51:4 Against you, only you, have I sinned, and done that which is wrong in your sight: you therefore are just when you speak, and clear when you utter judgment.
PSA 51:5 See! In guilt was I brought to the birth, and in sin did my mother conceive me.
PSA 51:6 It’s the innermost truth you desire, give me therefore true wisdom of heart.
PSA 51:7 Purge me clean with hyssop, wash me whiter than snow.
PSA 51:8 Fill me with joy and gladness, let the bones you have broken rejoice.
PSA 51:9 Hide your face from my sins, and blot out my guilt altogether.
PSA 51:10 Create me a clean heart, O God, put a new steadfast spirit within me.
PSA 51:11 Cast me not forth from your presence, withdraw not your holy spirit.
PSA 51:12 Give me back the joy of your help, with a willing spirit sustain me.
PSA 51:13 I will teach your ways to transgressors, and sinners shall turn to you.
PSA 51:14 Save me from blood, O God, and my tongue shall ring out your faithfulness.
PSA 51:15 Open my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall declare your praise.
PSA 51:16 For in sacrifice you have no pleasure, in gifts of burnt-offering no delight.
PSA 51:17 The sacrifice pleasing to God is a spirit that is broken; a heart that is crushed, O God, you will not despise.
PSA 51:18 Do good in your pleasure to Zion, build the walls of Jerusalem.
PSA 51:19 Then will you welcome the due forms of sacrifice, then on your altars shall bullocks be offered.
PSA 52:1 For the leader. A maskil of David, when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul that David had gone to Abimelech’s house. Why glory in mischief, you hero? God’s kindness is all the day.
PSA 52:2 Engulfing ruin you plot, your tongue like a razor sharpened, you practiser of deceit.
PSA 52:3 Evil, not good, you love, and falsehood, not words of truth. Selah
PSA 52:4 But you love all words that devour, and a tongue that is given to deceit.
PSA 52:5 But God, on his part, shall destroy you forever, grasp you and pluck you out of your tent, and root you out of the land of the living. Selah
PSA 52:6 Smitten with awe at the sight, the righteous shall laugh at you.
PSA 52:7 ‘Look’ (they will say) ‘at the hero who did not make God his stronghold, but trusted in his great wealth and in the strength of his riches.’
PSA 52:8 But I am like a fresh olive-tree in the house of God. I trust in the kindness of God for ever and evermore.
PSA 52:9 I will render you thanks for ever for what you have done. I will tell how good you are in the presence of those who love you.
PSA 53:1 For the leader. On mahalath. A maskil of David. Fools say in their heart, ‘There is no God.’ Vile, hateful their life is; not one does good.
PSA 53:2 From heaven God looks out on humans, to see if any are wise, and care for God.
PSA 53:3 But all have turned bad, the taint is on all; not one does good, no, not one.
PSA 53:4 Have they learned their lesson, those workers of evil? Who ate up my people, eating, devouring, never calling to the Lord.
PSA 53:5 Sore afraid will they be, where no fear was; when God scatters the bones of the godless people. They will be put to shame, when God rejects them.
PSA 53:6 If only help from Zion would come for Israel! When God brings his people a change of fortune, how glad will be Jacob, and Israel how joyful!
PSA 54:1 For the leader. With stringed instruments. A maskil of David, when the Ziphites came and said to Saul, “David is in hiding among us”. Save me, O God, by your name, by your power secure for me justice.
PSA 54:2 Listen, O God, to my prayer, attend to the words of my mouth.
PSA 54:3 For proud men have risen against me, and terrible men seek my life, men who do not set God before them. Selah
PSA 54:4 But see! God is my helper, the Lord is sustaining my life.
PSA 54:5 Let their evil fall back on my foes: cut them off in your faithfulness, Lord.
PSA 54:6 Then will I bring you glad sacrifice, praising your gracious name;
PSA 54:7 for from all distress you have saved me, and feasted my eyes on my foes.
PSA 55:1 For the leader. With stringed instruments. A maskil of David. Listen, God, to my prayer. Don’t hide yourself from my pleading.
PSA 55:2 Hear me, and answer; for bitter is my lament.
PSA 55:3 I am wild with the noise of the foe, with the clamour of the ungodly; for they hurl disaster upon me, and attack me with fury.
PSA 55:4 My heart shudders within me, terrors of deaths press on me,
PSA 55:5 fear and trembling attack me, and horror wraps me round.
PSA 55:6 O for the wings of a dove: I would fly away and rest.
PSA 55:7 I would wander far away, find refuge in the wilderness. Selah
PSA 55:8 I would find myself a shelter from raging wind and tempest.
PSA 55:9 Confuse them, Lord, upset their plans; for I see violence and strife in the city.
PSA 55:10 By day and by night they make their rounds on the city walls, while within is crime and trouble,
PSA 55:11 within is ruin. Her market-place is never free of deceit and tyranny.
PSA 55:12 The taunts were not those of a foe that I could have borne; the disdain was not that of an enemy I could have shunned them:
PSA 55:13 but it was you, my equal, my dear and familiar friend.
PSA 55:14 We used to be so close, together we walked in God’s house with the crowd.
PSA 55:15 May death suddenly take them, may they go down to Sheol alive, for evil lives in their homes and their hearts.
PSA 55:16 But I will call on God, the Lord will save me.
PSA 55:17 Evening and morning and noon I lament and moan. He will hear my voice;
PSA 55:18 though I am attacked by many he will rescue me, unharmed from the war.
PSA 55:19 God, who sits on his ancient throne will hear and will humble them, for they never change, they never fear God. Selah
PSA 55:20 My friend turned against me, betrayed his word.
PSA 55:21 His mouth was smoother than butter, but war filled his heart. His words were softer than oil, but sharper than swords.
PSA 55:22 Cast your burden on the Lord, and he will sustain you. He will never let the righteous be shaken.
PSA 55:23 But you, God, will hurl them down to the deepest pit. Bloody and treacherous people will not live out half their days; but I will trust you.
PSA 56:1 For the leader. On jonath elem rehokim. Of David. A michtam, when the Philistines seized him in Gath. O God, be gracious to me, for people trample upon me, all the day righting and pressing me.
PSA 56:2 All the day enemies trample me; many there be who contend with me bitterly.
PSA 56:3 In the day of my terror I trust in you.
PSA 56:4 In God I maintain my cause, in God I fearlessly trust. What can flesh do to me?
PSA 56:5 They torture me all the day, they ceaselessly plan to hurt me,
PSA 56:6 banded together in secret, watching my every step, as those who hope for my death.
PSA 56:7 Pay them out for their sin, O God, hurl down the strong in your anger.
PSA 56:8 You yourself count my wanderings. Put in your bottle my tears are they not in your book?
PSA 56:9 Then shall my foes be turned back in the day that I call. Of this I am sure, because God is for me.
PSA 56:10 In God I maintain my cause, in the Lord I maintain my cause.
PSA 56:11 In God I fearlessly trust, what can people do to me?
PSA 56:12 Your vows are upon me, O God, I will render thank-offerings to you;
PSA 56:13 because you have saved me from death, my feet from stumbling, to the end that I walk before God in the light of the living.
PSA 57:1 For the leader. Al tashheth. A michtam of David, when he fled from Saul into a cave. Be gracious, O God, be gracious to me, for in you I take shelter. In your sheltering wings I take refuge, till ruin be over past.
PSA 57:2 I cry to the Most High God, to the God who accomplishes for me.
PSA 57:3 He will send me his succour from heaven, he will thrust away those who would trample me. Selah
PSA 57:4 In the midst of lions I lie, who devour human prey. Their teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue is a sharpened sword.
PSA 57:5 Be exalted, God, o’er the heavens, and your glory o’er all the earth.
PSA 57:6 They set a net for my feet, but in it was their own foot caught. Before me they dug a pit, but they fell into it themselves. Selah
PSA 57:7 My heart is steadfast, O God, my heart is steadfast. I would sing, I would make music;
PSA 57:8 awake, my soul. Awake, harp and lyre; I would wake the dawn.
PSA 57:9 I would praise you among the peoples, O Lord, and make music among the nations to you;
PSA 57:10 for great to heaven is your love, and your faithfulness to the clouds.
PSA 57:11 Be exalted, God, o’er the heavens, and your glory o’er all the earth.
PSA 58:1 For the leader. Al tashheth. Of David. A michtam. Do you speak what is right, you gods? With equity judge you your people?
PSA 58:2 In the land you practise iniquity – all of you; violence do you dispense with your hands.
PSA 58:3 The wicked go astray from the womb liars take the wrong path from their birth.
PSA 58:4 Venom have they like the venom of snakes, they are like the deaf adder that stops her ears,
PSA 58:5 and refuses to listen to the voice of the charmer, or binder of spells, no matter how cunning.
PSA 58:6 O God, break to pieces the teeth in their mouth, tear out the great teeth of the young lions, Lord.
PSA 58:7 May they melt away like running water! Like tender grass, cut down may they be!
PSA 58:8 Like the snail that dissolves on its crawling path, like the birth untimely which sees not the sunlight.
PSA 58:9 Faster than a thorn-fire heats your pots, he will come with his tempest and sweep them away.
PSA 58:10 The sight of such vengeance will gladden the righteous; their feet they will wash in the blood of the wicked.
PSA 58:11 People will say, ‘Yes, the just are rewarded: yes, on the earth is a God who is Judge.’
PSA 59:1 For the leader. Al tashheth. Of David. A michtam, when Saul sent men to watch his house in order to kill him. Save me, O God, from my enemies; secure me from my assailants.
PSA 59:2 Save me from those who do wrong, save me from the bloodthirsty.
PSA 59:3 For see! They lay ambush for me, strong men are banded against me not for sin or transgression of mine, for no guilt of mine, O Lord,
PSA 59:4 they run and make ready. Awake! Come forth to meet me, and see!
PSA 59:5 You, O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, awake! And punish the proud, every one; spare none of the traitors vile. Selah
PSA 59:6 At evening they come, and, howling like dogs, make their round in the city.
PSA 59:7 Look at their venomous mouths, tongues like swords, they think no one hears them.
PSA 59:8 But you, Lord, laugh at them, you mock all the insolent.
PSA 59:9 My strength, I will sing to you, for God is my sure retreat.
PSA 59:10 My God with his love will meet me, and feast my eyes on my foes.
PSA 59:11 Slay them not, lest my people forget, let your hosts keep them roaming and wandering.
PSA 59:12 In their sinful speech snare them, O Lord; and may they be trapped in their pride, for the curses and lies that they utter.
PSA 59:13 In your wrath make a clean end of them, that people, to the ends of the earth, may know that God rules in Jacob. Selah
PSA 59:14 At evening they come, and, howling like dogs, make their round in the city.
PSA 59:15 They roam about for a feast, and snarl, if they get not their fill.
PSA 59:16 But I will sing of your might; I will ring out your love in the morning. For to me you have been a sure refuge, a retreat in the day of my trouble.
PSA 59:17 My strength, I will sing praise to you, for God is my sure retreat, my faithful God.
PSA 60:1 For the leader. On shushan eduth. A michtam of David (for teaching), when he fought with Aram-naharaim and Aram-zobah, and Joab returned and defeated twelve thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt. O God, you have spurned and broken us, routing us in your wrath – restore us!
PSA 60:2 You have shaken the land and cleft it; heal its tottering breaches.
PSA 60:3 You have made your people drink hardship, and given us wine of reeling.
PSA 60:4 You have given those who fear you a banner, a rallying-place from the bow, Selah
PSA 60:5 for the rescue of your beloved. Save by your right hand and answer us.
PSA 60:6 God did solemnly swear: ‘As victor will I divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.
PSA 60:7 Mine is Gilead, mine is Manasseh, Ephraim is the defence of my head, Judah my sceptre of rule,
PSA 60:8 Moab the pot that I wash in, Edom – I cast my shoe over it, I shout o’er Philistia in triumph.’
PSA 60:9 O to be brought to the fortified city! O to be led into Edom!
PSA 60:10 Have you not spurned us, O God? You do not march forth with our armies.
PSA 60:11 Grant us help from the foe, for human help is worthless.
PSA 60:12 With God we shall yet do bravely: he himself will tread down our foes.
PSA 61:1 For the leader. On stringed instruments. Of David. Hear my cry, O God, be attentive to my prayer.
PSA 61:2 From the ends of the earth I call unto you, when my heart is faint: lead me to the rock that is high above me.
PSA 61:3 For you are a refuge to me, a strong tower in face of the foe.
PSA 61:4 O to be guest in your tent forever, hiding beneath your sheltering wings! Selah
PSA 61:5 For you, O God, do hear my vows, and grant the desires of those who fear you.
PSA 61:6 Add many days to the life of the king; may his years endure throughout all generations.
PSA 61:7 In the presence of God be he throned forever; may kindness and faithfulness watch over him.
PSA 61:8 And I will sing praise to your name forever, paying my vows day after day.
PSA 62:1 For the leader. On jeduthun. A psalm of David. I wait alone in silence for God; From him comes my help.
PSA 62:2 Yes, he is my rock, my help, my retreat, I shall not be shaken too sorely.
PSA 62:3 How long will you, all of you, batter a man, as one might a leaning wall?
PSA 62:4 From his height they are planning to topple him. They take pleasure in falsehood; they bless with their mouth, but inwardly they curse. Selah
PSA 62:5 I wait alone in silence for God; for from him comes my hope.
PSA 62:6 Yes, he is my rock, my help, my retreat, I shall not be shaken too sorely.
PSA 62:7 On God rests my honour and safety, in God is my strong rock, my refuge.
PSA 62:8 Trust in him, all you people assembled, pour out your heart in his presence; God is a refuge for us. Selah
PSA 62:9 The lowly are nought but a breath, the lofty are but an illusion: in the balances up they go, they are lighter than breath altogether.
PSA 62:10 Trust not in gain of extortion, set no vain hopes in robbery. As for wealth, if it bears fruit, set not your heart upon it.
PSA 62:11 One thing God has uttered, two things there are which I heard that power belongs to God,
PSA 62:12 and to you, too, O Lord, belongs kindness; for you requite each person according to what they have done.
PSA 63:1 A psalm of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah. O God, my God, you, you do I seek: my heart thirsts for you, my body faints for you in a parched and waterless land.
PSA 63:2 As I in the temple have seen you, beholding your power and your glory,
PSA 63:3 for better than life is your kindness: my lips shall utter your praise.
PSA 63:4 So, while I live, I will bless you, and lift up my hands in your name.
PSA 63:5 As with marrow and fat am I feasted; with joyful lips I will praise you.
PSA 63:6 I call you to mind on my bed, and muse on you in the night watches;
PSA 63:7 for you have been my help, I joyfully sing in the shadow of your wings.
PSA 63:8 I cling close after you, your right hand holds me up.
PSA 63:9 But those who seek after my life shall go down to the depths of the earth,
PSA 63:10 given o’er to the power of the sword, or as prey for jackals to devour.
PSA 63:11 But the king shall rejoice in God: all who own his allegiance will glory. For the mouth of the false shall be stopped.
PSA 64:1 For the leader. A psalm of David. Hear, O my God, the voice of my lament: guard my life from the dread of the foe.
PSA 64:2 Hide me from villains who secretly plot, from the blustering throng of the workers of evil,
PSA 64:3 who have sharpened their tongue like a sword, and aimed bitter words like arrows,
PSA 64:4 which from ambush they launch at the blameless, shooting swiftly and unafraid.
PSA 64:5 They strengthen their wicked purpose, they tell of the snares they have hidden, they say to themselves, ‘Who can see?’
PSA 64:6 They think out their crimes full cunningly hidden deep in their crafty hearts.
PSA 64:7 But God with his arrow will shoot them, swiftly shall they be smitten.
PSA 64:8 For their tongue he will bring them to ruin, all will shudder with horror at the sight of them.
PSA 64:9 Then every person, touched to awe, as they ponder what God has wrought, will tell the tale of his deeds.
PSA 64:10 In the Lord shall the righteous rejoice, in him shall they take refuge; and all the true-hearted shall glory.
PSA 65:1 For the leader. A psalm of David. A song. It is seemly to praise you, O God, in Zion, and to you shall the vow be performed in Jerusalem.
PSA 65:2 O you who hear prayer, unto you shall all flesh come.
PSA 65:3 Our sins are too mighty for us, our transgressions you only can cover them.
PSA 65:4 Happy the person who you choose to live beside you in your courts. O may we be filled with the joys of your house, of your holy temple.
PSA 65:5 In dread deeds you loyally answer us, O God of our salvation, whom all ends of the earth put their trust in, and islands far away.
PSA 65:6 By your strength you establish the hills, you are armed with might;
PSA 65:7 you still the roaring of seas, and the turmoil of nations,
PSA 65:8 so that those who live at earth’s bounds are awed at your signs: the lands of the sunrise and sunset you make to ring with joy.
PSA 65:9 You visit and water the earth; you greatly enrich her with the river of God, which is full of water. You prepare the corn thereof,
PSA 65:10 watering her furrows, settling her ridges; you make her soft with showers, and bless what grows thereon.
PSA 65:11 You crown the year with your goodness, your chariot tracks drip with fatness.
PSA 65:12 The desert pastures are lush, the hills greened with joy.
PSA 65:13 The meadows are clothed with flocks, the valleys are covered with corn; they shout to each other and sing.
PSA 66:1 For the leader. A song. A psalm. Shout to God, all the earth,
PSA 66:2 sing praise to his glorious name, sing his glorious praise.
PSA 66:3 Say to God, ‘How dread are your works, so great is your might that your enemies cringe to you.
PSA 66:4 All the earth does homage to you, singing praises to you, singing praise to your name.’ Selah
PSA 66:5 Come and see what God has done, awe-inspiring is he in his works among people.
PSA 66:6 He turns the sea into dry land, and people cross the river on foot. Let us therefore rejoice in him,
PSA 66:7 the mighty Ruler eternal, whose eyes keep watch on the nations, that no rebel lift up his head. Selah
PSA 66:8 O bless our God, you peoples; sound aloud his praise,
PSA 66:9 who keeps us in life, and keeps our feet from slipping.
PSA 66:10 For you, God, have tested us, have tried us, as silver is tried.
PSA 66:11 You did bring us into prison, and put chains upon us,
PSA 66:12 you did let people ride over our head. We went through fire and through water, but you led us out to a spacious place.
PSA 66:13 I will enter your house with burnt-offerings, I will pay to you my vows,
PSA 66:14 which my open lips have uttered, arid my mouth has declared in my straits.
PSA 66:15 I will offer you offerings of fatlings, with the odour of burning rams, I will sacrifice bullocks with goats. Selah
PSA 66:16 Come and hear my story all who fear God – of what he has done for me.
PSA 66:17 For my mouth had no sooner invoked him than his praise was under my tongue.
PSA 66:18 Had I cherished sin in my heart, the Lord would never have listened.
PSA 66:19 But assuredly God has listened, and attended to my loud prayer.
PSA 66:20 Blessed be God, who turned not aside my prayer, nor withdrew his kindness from me.
PSA 67:1 For the leader. On stringed instruments. A psalm. A song. Bless us, O God, with your favour, let the light of your face fall upon us; Selah
PSA 67:2 that the world may know your way, and all nations your power to save.
PSA 67:3 Let the peoples praise you, O God; let the peoples all of them praise you.
PSA 67:4 Let the nations ring out their joy; for you govern the peoples with equity, and guide the nations on earth. Selah
PSA 67:5 Let the peoples praise you, O God, let the peoples, all of them, praise you.
PSA 67:6 The earth has yielded her increase by the blessing of God, our God.
PSA 67:7 May this blessing of ours win people to him to all the ends of the earth.
PSA 68:1 For the leader. Of David. A psalm. A song. God arises, his enemies scatter: they who hate him flee before him.
PSA 68:2 As smoke before wind is driven, as wax melts before fire, so before God vanish the wicked.
PSA 68:3 But the righteous rejoice in God’s presence, they exult with exceeding joy.
PSA 68:4 Sing to God, make music to his name, his name is the Lord, praise him who rides on the clouds, and exult in his presence.
PSA 68:5 Father of orphans, defender of widows, is God in his holy abode.
PSA 68:6 God brings home the lonely, he leads forth the prisoner to comfort, so that none but the rebel lives cheerless.
PSA 68:7 God, when you went in front of your people in your march through the desert, Selah
PSA 68:8 earth shook, the heavens poured rain at the presence of God, Sinai’s God at the presence of God, Israel’s God.
PSA 68:9 Rain in abundance, God, you did sprinkle, restoring the languishing land of your heritage.
PSA 68:10 A dwelling therein your people found: in your goodness, O God, you did care for the poor.
PSA 68:11 The Lord spoke the glad tidings of victory, a great army of women proclaim it:
PSA 68:12 ‘Kings of armies they flee, they flee, and the housewife divides the spoil:
PSA 68:13 dove’s wings covered with silver and pinions with shimmer of gold,
PSA 68:14 set with stones, like snow upon Zalmon.’
PSA 68:15 A mountain of God is the mountain of Bashan, a mountain of peaks is the mountain of Bashan.
PSA 68:16 You high-peaked mountains, why look you askance at the mountain which God has desired for his home whereon the Lord will live forever?
PSA 68:17 The chariots of God are twice ten thousand: the Lord came from Sinai, his holy place.
PSA 68:18 You did mount the height with trains of your captives, and gifts that you had received from the people. The rebels shall live with the Lord God.
PSA 68:19 Blest be the Lord who sustains us daily, the God who is also our saviour. Selah
PSA 68:20 Our God is a God who is saviour. The ways of escape from death are known to the Lord God.
PSA 68:21 Yes, God will shatter the head of his foes the rough scalp of those who strut on in their sins.
PSA 68:22 The Lord said: ‘I will bring you home from Bashan, home from the depths of the sea,
PSA 68:23 that your feet you may bathe in blood, and your dogs lick their share of the foe.’
PSA 68:24 In the temple appear God’s triumphal processions, processions in praise of my king and my God,
PSA 68:25 with singers in front, and minstrels behind, and maidens with timbrels between them, singing,
PSA 68:26 ‘You of the well-spring of Israel, bless the Lord God in the dance.’
PSA 68:27 There, in front, is Benjamin the little, the princes of Judah beside them, the princes of Zebulon, princes of Naphtali.
PSA 68:28 God, show your strength, your godlike might, as you did in the past,
PSA 68:29 from your temple that crowns Jerusalem. Kings shall bring tribute to you.
PSA 68:30 Rebuke the beast of the reed, the herd of bulls, with the calves of the peoples. Trample down the lovers of lies. Scatter the nations whose joy is in war.
PSA 68:31 May they come from Egypt with gifts of oil, Ethiopia haste with full hands to God.
PSA 68:32 Sing to God, O you kingdoms of earth, make melody to the Lord. Selah
PSA 68:33 Praise him who rides on the ancient heavens. See! He utters his voice, his mighty voice.
PSA 68:34 Ascribe strength to the God over Israel, whose strength and majesty live in the skies.
PSA 68:35 Awe-inspiring is God in his holy place, it is Israel’s God who gives strength and might to his people. Blessed be God.
PSA 69:1 For the leader. On shoshannim. Of David. Save me, O God; for the waters are threatening my life.
PSA 69:2 I am sunk in depths of mire, where ground there is none. I am come into deep deep waters, the flood overwhelms me.
PSA 69:3 I am weary of crying, my throat is parched, my eyes are wasted with waiting for God.
PSA 69:4 More than the hairs of my head are those who wantonly hate me. More than my bones in number are those who are falsely my foes. That which I never robbed, how am I then to restore?
PSA 69:5 O God, you know my folly, my guilt is not hidden from you.
PSA 69:6 Through me let not any be shamed, who wait for you, Lord God of hosts. Through me let not those be confounded who seek you, O God of Israel.
PSA 69:7 It’s in your cause that I have borne taunts, and my face has been covered with shame;
PSA 69:8 I became to my kindred a foreigner, to my mother’s sons a stranger.
PSA 69:9 It was zeal for your house that consumed me, and the insults they hurled at you fell upon me.
PSA 69:10 When I chastened myself with fasting, they took occasion to taunt me.
PSA 69:11 When I put on a garment of sackcloth, they made me the theme of a taunt-song.
PSA 69:12 Those who sit in the gate make sport of me in the music of drunken songs.
PSA 69:13 But I pray to you, Lord, for a time of favour. In your great love answer me; with your loyal help, save me
PSA 69:14 from sinking down in the mire. Lift me out of the deep deep waters,
PSA 69:15 that the rushing flood may not drown me, that the deep may not swallow me up, nor the pit close her mouth upon me.
PSA 69:16 Answer me, Lord, in your gracious kindness, turn to me in your great compassion.
PSA 69:17 Hide not your face from your servant, for I am in trouble; O answer me speedily.
PSA 69:18 Draw near to me, redeem me; because of my enemies, ransom me.
PSA 69:19 You know how I am insulted; in your sight are all my foes.
PSA 69:20 Insult has broken my heart, past cure are my shame and confusion. For pity I looked – there was none! And for comforters, but I found none.
PSA 69:21 Poison they gave me for food, and to slake my thirst they gave vinegar.
PSA 69:22 May their table, outspread, be a trap to them, and their peace-offerings be a snare.
PSA 69:23 May their eyes be darkened and blind, make them shake without ceasing.
PSA 69:24 Pour your indignation upon them, let your burning wrath overtake them.
PSA 69:25 May their camp be a desolation, in their tents be there none to live.
PSA 69:26 For those whom you struck, they persecute, and those whom you wounded, they pain yet more.
PSA 69:27 Charge them with sin upon sin, may they not be acquitted by you.
PSA 69:28 From the book of life be they blotted, may their names not be written with the righteous.
PSA 69:29 Lift me, O God, by your help above my pain and misery.
PSA 69:30 Then will I praise God in song and magnify him with thanksgiving,
PSA 69:31 which shall please the Lord better than ox, or than bullock with horns and hoofs.
PSA 69:32 The oppressed shall rejoice at the sight. You who seek after God, let your heart revive.
PSA 69:33 For the Lord listens to the poor, he does not despise his prisoners.
PSA 69:34 Let the heavens and the earth sing his praises, the seas, and all creatures that move in them.
PSA 69:35 For God will bring help to Zion, and build up the cities of Judah, his people shall live there in possession.
PSA 69:36 His servants’ children shall have it for heritage, and those who love him shall live therein.
PSA 70:1 For the leader. Of David. For commemoration. Quickly, God, deliver me, hasten to help me, Lord.
PSA 70:2 May those who are seeking my life, be ashamed and confounded.
PSA 70:3 May those who delight in my hurt be defeated and brought to dishonour.
PSA 70:4 But may all who seek after you rejoice and be glad in you. May all who love your salvation say, ‘Glory to God,’ evermore.
PSA 70:5 I am weak and needy: make haste, God, to me. You are my help and deliverer; Lord, don’t delay.
PSA 71:1 In you, O Lord, I take refuge, let me never be put to shame.
PSA 71:2 In your faithfulness save me and rescue me, bend your ear to me and save me.
PSA 71:3 Be to me a rock of defence, a fortified house, to save me; for my rock and my fortress are you.
PSA 71:4 Save me, my God, from the hand of the wicked, from the grasp of the unjust and cruel.
PSA 71:5 For you, Lord, are my hope, in whom from my youth I have trusted.
PSA 71:6 On you have I leaned from my birth; from my mother’s womb it was you who did draw me. In you is my hope evermore.
PSA 71:7 I have been as a wonder to many, for you are my refuge and strength.
PSA 71:8 All the day long my mouth is filled with your praise and your glory.
PSA 71:9 Cast me not off in the time of old age; when my strength is spent, forsake me not.
PSA 71:10 For my foes whisper against me, they who watch me take counsel together;
PSA 71:11 ‘God has left him,’ they say: ‘pursue and seize him, for he is helpless.’
PSA 71:12 O God, be not far from me, haste, O my God, to my help.
PSA 71:13 Put my foes to shame and dishonour, with insult and shame be they covered.
PSA 71:14 But I will never stop hoping, and more and yet more will I praise you.
PSA 71:15 All the day long shall my mouth tell your faithfulness and your salvation, though I know not how they may be counted.
PSA 71:16 I will tell of the might of the Lord, and your faithfulness praise, you alone.
PSA 71:17 You have taught me, O God, from my youth, and till now have I told of your wonders.
PSA 71:18 Even in old age and grey hair, O God, do not forsake me. Still would I tell of your might unto all generations to come.
PSA 71:19 Your power and your justice, O God, extend as far as the heavens: for great are the things you have done. Who is like you, O God?
PSA 71:20 You have caused us to see troubles many, but you will revive us again. From the depths of the earth you will bring me up again.
PSA 71:21 You will multiply my greatness, and comfort me again.
PSA 71:22 So with harp I will praise you, and your faithfulness, O my God; and make music to you on the lyre, O you Holy One of Israel.
PSA 71:23 My lips shall ring out their joy, my mouth shall sing praises to you; all of me, which you have redeemed.
PSA 71:24 Yes, all the day long shall my tongue utter your righteousness; for ashamed and confounded are they who were seeking my hurt.
PSA 72:1 Of Solomon. Give the king, O God, your own spirit of justice your spirit of right to the son of the king,
PSA 72:2 that with right he may judge your people, and your downtrodden ones with justice.
PSA 72:3 May the mountains bear weal for the people, and the hills yield fruits of justice.
PSA 72:4 The weak may he help to their rights, may he save the sons of the needy and crush the oppressor in pieces.
PSA 72:5 May he live as long as the sun, while the moon shines – for ages and ages.
PSA 72:6 May he be like the rain on the meadow, like showers that water the earth.
PSA 72:7 In his days may justice flourish, and welfare abound, till the moon be no more.
PSA 72:8 May he reign from ocean to ocean, from the river to the ends of the earth.
PSA 72:9 May his foes bow down before him, his enemies lick the dust.
PSA 72:10 May tribute be rendered by kings of the isles and of Tarshish; may gifts be brought by the kings of Sheba and Seba.
PSA 72:11 May all kings fall prostrate before him, and all nations yield him their service.
PSA 72:12 For he saves the poor when he cries, the helpless and the downtrodden.
PSA 72:13 He pities the weak and the poor, he saves the lives of the poor.
PSA 72:14 He redeems them from wrong and from violence, for dear is their blood in his sight.
PSA 72:15 Long may he live; and may gold of Sheba be given him; prayer, too, be made for him ceaselessly, all the day long may men bless him.
PSA 72:16 May the land have abundance of corn, to the tops of the hills may it wave. May the fruit thereof flourish like Lebanon, may men spring from the city like grass of the earth.
PSA 72:17 May his name be blessed forever, may his fame endure as the sun. May all nations envy his blessedness, all tribes of the earth call him happy.
PSA 72:18 Blest be the Lord God, Israel’s God, who alone does wonders;
PSA 72:19 And blest be forever his glorious name. Let all the earth be filled with his glory. Amen and Amen.
PSA 72:20 Here end the prayers of David, son of Jesse.
PSA 73:1 A psalm of Asaph. Yes, God is good to the upright, the Lord to the pure in heart.
PSA 73:2 But my feet were almost gone, my steps had nearly slipped,
PSA 73:3 through envy of godless braggarts, when I saw how well they fared.
PSA 73:4 For never a pang have they, their body is sound and sleek.
PSA 73:5 They have no trouble like mortals, no share in human pain.
PSA 73:6 So they wear their pride like a necklace, they put on the garment of wrong,
PSA 73:7 their eyes stand out with fatness, their heart swells with riotous fancies.
PSA 73:8 Their speech is mocking and evil, condescending and crooked their speech.
PSA 73:9 They have set their mouth in the heavens, while their tongue struts about on the earth.
PSA 73:10 Small wonder that people resort to them, and drink deep draughts of their lore.
PSA 73:11 ‘How does God know?’ they say, ‘And has the Most High any knowledge?’
PSA 73:12 See! These are the godless, with wealth and ease ever increasing.
PSA 73:13 Yes, in vain have I kept my heart pure, and washed my hands in innocence;
PSA 73:14 for all the day long was I plagued not a morning but I was chastised.
PSA 73:15 But to resolve to speak like they do would be treachery to your children.
PSA 73:16 So I sought to understand it, but a wearisome task it seemed:
PSA 73:17 till I entered the holy world of God and saw clearly their destiny.
PSA 73:18 Yes, you set them on slippery places; down to destruction you hurl them.
PSA 73:19 One moment and then what a horror of ruin! They are finished and ended in terrors.
PSA 73:20 Like a dream, when one wakes, shall they be, whose phantoms the waker despises.
PSA 73:21 So my bitterness of mind and the pain that stabbed my heart
PSA 73:22 show how dull I was and stupid just like a beast before you.
PSA 73:23 But I am always with you, you have hold of my right hand.
PSA 73:24 By a plan of yours you guide me and will afterward take me to glory.
PSA 73:25 Whom have I in the heavens but you? And on earth there is none I desire beside you.
PSA 73:26 Though flesh and heart waste away, yet God is the rock of my heart, yet God is my portion forever.
PSA 73:27 For see! Those who are far from you must perish, you destroy all who are false to you.
PSA 73:28 But I am happy when close to God; the Lord my God I have made my refuge, that I may recount all the things you have done.
PSA 74:1 A maskil of Asaph. Why, O God, have you spurned us forever? Why smokes your wrath against the sheep of your pasture?
PSA 74:2 Remember the community you purchased of old to become by redemption the tribe of your heritage, Zion, the mountain you made your home.
PSA 74:3 Rouse yourself, visit its ruins complete. In the temple the foe has made havoc of all things.
PSA 74:4 Like lions your enemies roared through your house, replacing our symbols by signs of their own,
PSA 74:5 hacking, like woodsmen who lift axes on thickets of trees,
PSA 74:6 smashing with hatchets and hammers all of its carved work together.
PSA 74:7 They have set your temple on fire, to the very ground they have outraged the place where lives your name.
PSA 74:8 They have said in their heart, ‘Let us utterly crush them.’ They have burned all the houses of God in the land.
PSA 74:9 No symbol of ours do we see any more: no prophet is there any more, none is with us who knows how long.
PSA 74:10 How long, O God, is the foe to insult? Shall the enemy spurn your name forever?
PSA 74:11 Why, O Lord, do you hold back your hand, why keep your right hand in the folds of your robe?
PSA 74:12 Yet God is our king from the ancient days, in the midst of the earth working deeds of salvation.
PSA 74:13 It was you who did cleave the sea by your might, and shatter the heads of the ocean monsters.
PSA 74:14 It was you who did crush many-headed Leviathan, and give him as food to the beasts of the wilderness.
PSA 74:15 It was you who did cleave the fountains and torrents; it was you who did dry the perennial streams.
PSA 74:16 Yours is the day; yours, too, is the night, it was you who did establish the sun and the star.
PSA 74:17 It was you who did fix all the borders of earth: summer and winter it’s you who have made them.
PSA 74:18 Yet, for all this, the foe has insulted you, Lord, and a nation of fools has reviled your name.
PSA 74:19 Do not give your dove to the beasts, do not forget your afflicted forever.
PSA 74:20 Look to the sleek ones – how full they are: the dark places of earth are the dwellings of violence.
PSA 74:21 O let not the downtrodden turn back ashamed: let the poor and the needy sing praise to your name.
PSA 74:22 Arise, God, and defend your cause: remember how fools all the day insult you.
PSA 74:23 Do not forget the uproar of your enemies, the din of your foes that ascends evermore.
PSA 75:1 For the leader; al tashheth. A psalm of Asaph, a song. We praise you, God, we praise you: we would call on your name and declare your wonders.
PSA 75:2 ‘At the time I choose, I will judge fairly.
PSA 75:3 Though earth melt and all her inhabitants, it is I who keep steady her pillars.’ Selah
PSA 75:4 I say to the boasters, ‘Boast not’; to the wicked, ‘Lift not up your horn:
PSA 75:5 lift not your horn on high, speak not boldly against the Rock.’
PSA 75:6 For not from east nor west, not from desert nor mountains;
PSA 75:7 but God himself is the judge, humbling one and exalting another.
PSA 75:8 In the hand of the Lord is a cup foaming wine, richly spiced. Out of this he pours a draught, and all the wicked of earth must drain it down to the dregs.
PSA 75:9 But I will rejoice forever, singing praise to the God of Jacob.
PSA 75:10 I will hew all the horns of the wicked, but the horns of the just shall be lifted.
PSA 76:1 For the leader. With instrumental music. A psalm of Asaph, a song. God has made himself known in Judah, his name is great in Israel.
PSA 76:2 His tent is in Salem, his dwelling in Zion.
PSA 76:3 There he broke the lightning arrows, shield, sword, and weapons of war. Selah
PSA 76:4 Terrible is your splendour on the everlasting mountains.
PSA 76:5 Despoiled were the stout of heart; in the sleep into which they had fallen, none of the warriors could lift a hand.
PSA 76:6 At your rebuke, God of Jacob, sank chariot and horse to sleep.
PSA 76:7 Awful are you: who can stand before you, when once you are angry?
PSA 76:8 The judgment you gave from heaven frightened the earth into silence,
PSA 76:9 when God arose to judgment to save the oppressed of the earth. Selah
PSA 76:10 The fiercest will praise you, to you will the remnant hold festival.
PSA 76:11 Vow and pay to Lord your God, and let all who are round him bring presents.
PSA 76:12 He lops off the courage of princes, and with terror fills kings of the earth.
PSA 77:1 For the leader. On Jeduthun. Of Asaph, a psalm. Loudly will I lift my cry to God, loudly to God, so he hears to me.
PSA 77:2 In the day of my trouble I seek the Lord; in the night I lift my hands in prayer, refusing all comfort.
PSA 77:3 When I think of God, I moan; when I muse, my spirit is faint. Selah
PSA 77:4 When you hold my eyes awake, and I am restless and speechless,
PSA 77:5 I think of the days of old, call to mind distant years.
PSA 77:6 I commune with my heart in the night, I muse with inquiring spirit.
PSA 77:7 ‘Will the Lord cast us off forever, will he be gracious no more?
PSA 77:8 Has his love vanished forever? Is his faithfulness utterly gone?
PSA 77:9 Has God forgotten to be gracious, or in anger withheld his compassion?’ Selah
PSA 77:10 Then I said, ‘This it is that grieves me, that the hand of the Most High has changed.’
PSA 77:11 I will think of the deeds of the Lord, and remember your wonders of old.
PSA 77:12 I will muse on all you have wrought, and meditate on your deeds.
PSA 77:13 Then your way, O God, was majestic: what God was great as our God?
PSA 77:14 You were a God who did marvels, you did show your power to the world
PSA 77:15 by your arm you rescued your people, the children of Jacob and Joseph. Selah
PSA 77:16 The waters saw you, O God. The waters saw you and shivered; to their depths they trembled.
PSA 77:17 Clouds poured torrents of water, thunder rolled in the sky, your arrows sped to and fro.
PSA 77:18 Loud was the roll of your thunder, lightnings lit up the world. Earth quaked and trembled.
PSA 77:19 In your way, Lord, through the sea, in your path through the mighty waters, your footsteps were all unseen.
PSA 77:20 You did guide your folk like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.
PSA 78:1 A maskil of Asaph. My people, attend to my teaching: bend your ears to the words of my mouth,
PSA 78:2 as I open my mouth in a poem on the riddling story of the past.
PSA 78:3 What we have heard and known, and what our ancestors have told us,
PSA 78:4 we will not hide from their children. We will tell to the next generation the praises and might of the Lord, and the wonders that he has done.
PSA 78:5 He set up a testimony in Jacob, a law he appointed in Israel, which he commanded our ancestors to make known to their children,
PSA 78:6 that the next generation should know it, that the children yet to be born should arise and tell their children;
PSA 78:7 that in God they might put their confidence, and not forget God’s works; but that they might keep his commandments,
PSA 78:8 and not be like their ancestors, a generation defiant and stubborn, a generation with heart unsteady, and spirit unfaithful towards God.
PSA 78:9 Ephraimites, armed bowmen, turned back in the day of battle.
PSA 78:10 They did not keep God’s covenant, they refused to walk in his law.
PSA 78:11 They forgot what he had done, and the wonders he had shown them.
PSA 78:12 He did wonders before their ancestors in the country of Zoan in Egypt.
PSA 78:13 Through the sea which he split he brought them, making waters stand up like a heap;
PSA 78:14 he led them by day with a cloud, all the night with a light of fire.
PSA 78:15 From the rocks which he split in the wilderness, he gave them to drink as of ocean’s abundance.
PSA 78:16 He brought streams out of the rock, and made water run down like rivers.
PSA 78:17 Yet they still went on sinning against him, they defied the Most High in the desert.
PSA 78:18 They wilfully challenged God, demanding the food that they longed for.
PSA 78:19 ‘Is God able,’ such was their challenge, ‘to spread in the desert a table?
PSA 78:20 From the rock that he struck there gushed water, and torrents that overflowed; but can he also give bread, or provide his people with meat?’
PSA 78:21 When the Lord heard this, he was furious, and fire was kindled on Jacob, anger flared up against Israel.
PSA 78:22 For they put no trust in God, no confidence in his help.
PSA 78:23 So he summoned the clouds above; and, opening the doors of heaven,
PSA 78:24 he rained manna upon them for food, and grain of heaven he gave them.
PSA 78:25 Everyone ate the bread of angels; he sent them food to the full.
PSA 78:26 He launched the east wind in the heavens, and guided the south by his power.
PSA 78:27 He rained meat upon them like dust, winged bird like the sand of the sea.
PSA 78:28 In the midst of their camp he dropped it, all around their tents.
PSA 78:29 They ate and were more than filled; he had brought them the thing they desired.
PSA 78:30 But the thing they desired became loathsome: while their food was still in their mouths,
PSA 78:31 the wrath of God rose against them. He slew the stoutest among them, and laid low the young men of Israel.
PSA 78:32 Yet for all this they sinned yet more, and refused to believe in his wonders.
PSA 78:33 So he ended their days in a breath, and their years in sudden dismay.
PSA 78:34 When he slew them, then they sought after him, they turned and sought God with diligence.
PSA 78:35 They remembered that God was their rock, and the Most High God their redeemer.
PSA 78:36 But they flattered him with their mouth, and lied to him with their tongue.
PSA 78:37 Their heart was not steady with him, they were faithless to his covenant.
PSA 78:38 But he is full of pity: he pardons sin and destroys not. Often he turns his anger away, without stirring his wrath at all.
PSA 78:39 So he remembered that they were but flesh, breath that passes and does not return.
PSA 78:40 But how often they rebelled in the desert, and caused him grief in the wilderness,
PSA 78:41 tempting God again and again, provoking the Holy One of Israel.
PSA 78:42 They did not remember his strength, nor the day he redeemed from the foe,
PSA 78:43 how he set his signs in Egypt, in the country of Zoan his wonders.
PSA 78:44 He turned their canals into blood, their streams undrinkable.
PSA 78:45 He sent forth flies, which devoured them; frogs, too, which destroyed them.
PSA 78:46 Their crops he gave to the caterpillar, and the fruits of their toil to the locust.
PSA 78:47 He slew their vines with hail, and their sycamore trees with frost.
PSA 78:48 He delivered their cattle to the hail, and their flocks to bolts of fire.
PSA 78:49 He let loose his hot anger among them, fury and wrath and distress, a band of destroying angels.
PSA 78:50 He cleared a path for his anger, did not spare them from death, but gave them over to pestilence.
PSA 78:51 He struck down all the firstborn in Egypt, the first fruits of their strength in the tents of Ham.
PSA 78:52 He led forth his people like sheep, he was guide to his flock in the desert.
PSA 78:53 Securely he led them, and free from fear, while their foes were drowned in the sea.
PSA 78:54 To his holy realm he brought them, to the mountain his right hand had purchased.
PSA 78:55 He drove out the nations before them, and allotted their land for possession, and their tents for Israel to live in.
PSA 78:56 Yet they tempted and angered the Most High God, they did not observe his decrees.
PSA 78:57 They drew back, false like their ancestors; they failed like a treacherous bow.
PSA 78:58 Their shrines stirred him to anger, their idols moved him to jealousy.
PSA 78:59 When God heard of this, he was furious, and he spurned Israel utterly.
PSA 78:60 He abandoned his home in Shiloh, the tent he had pitched among people.
PSA 78:61 He gave his strength up to captivity, his glory to the hands of the foe.
PSA 78:62 He gave his people to the sword, he was furious with his own.
PSA 78:63 Fire devoured their young men, and their maidens had no marriage-song.
PSA 78:64 Their priests fell by the sword, and their widows could not weep.
PSA 78:65 Then the Lord awoke as from sleep, like a warrior flushed with wine;
PSA 78:66 and he beat back his foes, putting them to perpetual scorn.
PSA 78:67 He disowned the tent of Joseph, he rejected the tribe of Ephraim;
PSA 78:68 but he chose the tribe of Judah, Mount Zion, which he loves.
PSA 78:69 And he built like the heights his sanctuary, like the earth which he founded forever.
PSA 78:70 And he chose David his servant, taking him from the sheepfolds.
PSA 78:71 From the mother-ewes he brought him, to be shepherd to Jacob his people, and to Israel his inheritance.
PSA 78:72 With upright heart did he shepherd them, and with skilful hands did he guide them.
PSA 79:1 A psalm of Asaph. Heathen, O God, have come into your land, defiling your holy temple, and laying Jerusalem in ruins.
PSA 79:2 They have given the bodies of your dead servants to the birds of the air to devour, and the flesh of your faithful to the beasts of the field.
PSA 79:3 Round about Jerusalem they have poured out their blood like water; and there was no one to bury them.
PSA 79:4 On every side our neighbours revile us and mock us and jeer at us.
PSA 79:5 How long will you be angry, O Lord? Will your jealousy burn like fire forever?
PSA 79:6 Pour out your wrath on the nations that don’t know you, on the kingdoms that do not call on your name.
PSA 79:7 For Jacob they devoured, they have desolated his home.
PSA 79:8 Do not remember against us our ancestors’ sins; O meet us soon with your pity, for utterly weak are we.
PSA 79:9 Help us, O God our saviour, for the renown of your name: for your reputation deliver us and cover over our sins.
PSA 79:10 Why should the nations say, ‘Where is their God?’ Let revenge for the outpoured blood of your servants be shown on the heathen before our eyes.
PSA 79:11 May the groans of the prisoner come before you; free the children of death by your mighty arm.
PSA 79:12 Pay our neighbours back sevenfold for the scorn they have heaped upon you, O Lord.
PSA 79:13 Then we, your people, the flock of your pasture, will give thanks to you for evermore, and tell your praise to all generations.
PSA 80:1 For the leader. On shoshannim, eduth. Of Asaph, a psalm. Listen, Shepherd of Israel, who leads Joseph like a flock of sheep; from your throne on the cherubs shine forth
PSA 80:2 before Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin. Stir up your mighty power, come to our help.
PSA 80:3 God, restore us: show us the light of your face, so we may be saved.
PSA 80:4 O Lord of hosts, how long is your anger to smoke, despite the prayer of your people?
PSA 80:5 You have fed them with bread of tears, you have made them drink tears by the measure.
PSA 80:6 The scorn of our neighbours you make us, the laughing-stock of our foes.
PSA 80:7 God of hosts, restore us: show us the light of your face, so we may be saved.
PSA 80:8 A vine out of Egypt you brought; you did drive out the nations, and plant her;
PSA 80:9 in the ground you did clear she struck root, and she filled all the land.
PSA 80:10 The shade of her covered the mountains, her branches the cedars of God.
PSA 80:11 She sent forth her shoots to the sea, and her branches as far as the River.
PSA 80:12 Why have you torn down her fences, and left her to be plucked at by all who pass by,
PSA 80:13 to be gnawed by the boar from the forest, and devoured by the beasts of the field?
PSA 80:14 O God of hosts, return: look down from heaven and see and visit this vine, and restore her
PSA 80:15 the vine which your right hand has planted.
PSA 80:16 She is burned with fire and cut down before your stern face they are perishing.
PSA 80:17 Support the one you have chosen, the one you have raised for yourself;
PSA 80:18 then from you we will never draw back. Preserve us, and we will call on your name.
PSA 80:19 Lord, God of hosts, restore us: Show us the light of your face, so we may be saved.
PSA 81:1 For the leader. On the gittith. Of Asaph. Sing aloud to God our strength, shout for joy to the God of Jacob.
PSA 81:2 Raise a song, sound the timbrel, sweet lyre and harp.
PSA 81:3 On the new moon blow the horn, at the full moon, the day of our festival.
PSA 81:4 For this is a statute for Israel, a ruling of the God of Jacob,
PSA 81:5 a witness he set up in Joseph, when he marched against Egypt’s land, where he heard an unknown voice say:
PSA 81:6 ‘I removed from your shoulder the burden, and freed your hands from the basket.
PSA 81:7 At your call of distress I delivered you, from the thundercloud I answered you. At Meribah’s waters I tested you. Selah
PSA 81:8 ‘Listen, my people, to my warning, O Israel, if you would but listen!
PSA 81:9 There must not be a strange god among you, you must bow to no foreign god.
PSA 81:10 I am the Lord your God who brought you up out of Egypt. Open your mouth, that I fill it.
PSA 81:11 ‘But my people did not listen to my voice, Israel would have none of me.
PSA 81:12 So to their own hard hearts I left them, to follow their own devices.
PSA 81:13 O that my people would listen, that Israel would walk in my ways.
PSA 81:14 Soon would I humble their enemies, and turn my hand on their foes.
PSA 81:15 Those who hate the Lord would cringe before him in everlasting terror.
PSA 81:16 But you would I feed with the richest wheat, and with honey from the rock to your heart’s desire.’
PSA 82:1 A psalm of Asaph. God has taken his stand in the divine assembly: in the midst of the gods he holds judgment.
PSA 82:2 ‘How long will you crookedly judge, and favour the wicked? Selah
PSA 82:3 Do right by the weak and the orphan, acquit the innocent poor.
PSA 82:4 Rescue the weak and the needy, save them from the hand of the wicked.
PSA 82:5 ‘They have neither knowledge nor insight, in darkness they walk to and fro, while the earth’s foundations totter.
PSA 82:6 It was I who appointed you gods, children of the Most High all of you.
PSA 82:7 Yet like mortals you will surely die, you will fall like any prince.’
PSA 82:8 Arise, O God, judge the earth, for all nations are yours by inheritance.
PSA 83:1 A song, a psalm of Asaph. Do not keep silent, O God: hold not your peace, be not still, God.
PSA 83:2 For see! Your enemies roar, those who hate you lift up their heads,
PSA 83:3 laying crafty plans for your people, and plotting against those you treasure.
PSA 83:4 ‘Come, let us wipe them out as a nation, so Israel’s name will be mentioned no more.’
PSA 83:5 For, conspiring with one accord, they have made a league against you
PSA 83:6 Tents of Edom, and Ishmaelites, Moab, and the Hagrites.
PSA 83:7 Gebal and Ammon and Amalek, Philistia, with the people of Tyre;
PSA 83:8 Syria, too, is confederate, they have strengthened the children of Lot. Selah
PSA 83:9 Deal with them as you dealt with Midian, with Sisera, with Jabin, at the torrent of Kishon,
PSA 83:10 who at Endor were destroyed, and became dung for the field.
PSA 83:11 Make their nobles like Oreb and Zeeb, all their princes like Zebah and Zalmunna,
PSA 83:12 who said, ‘Let us take for ourselves the meadows of God.’
PSA 83:13 Whirl them, my God, like dust, like stubble before the wind.
PSA 83:14 As the fire that kindles the forest, as flame that sets mountains ablaze,
PSA 83:15 so with your tempest pursue them, terrify them with your hurricane.
PSA 83:16 Make them blush with shame; until they seek your name, O Lord.
PSA 83:17 Everlasting shame and confusion, disgrace and destruction be theirs.
PSA 83:18 Teach those who you alone are most high over all the earth.
PSA 84:1 For the leader. On the gittith. Of the Korahites, a psalm. How dearly loved is the place where you live, Lord of hosts!
PSA 84:2 How I long and yearn for the courts of the Lord. Now heart and flesh cry for joy to the living God.
PSA 84:3 Even the sparrow has found her a home and the swallow a nest, to lay her young, near your altar, Lord of hosts, my king and my God.
PSA 84:4 Happy those who live in your house, praising you evermore. Selah
PSA 84:5 Happy those whose strength is in you, people with pilgrim hearts.
PSA 84:6 As they pass through the valley of tears, they make it a place of fountains, clothed with the blessings of early rain.
PSA 84:7 From rampart to rampart on they march, till at last God reveals himself in Zion.
PSA 84:8 Lord, God of hosts, hear my prayer, attend, O God of Jacob. Selah
PSA 84:9 Behold, O God, our defender, and look upon your anointed,
PSA 84:10 for better a single day in your courts than a thousand in my own chambers: better stand at the door of the house of my God than live in the tents of ungodliness,
PSA 84:11 for the Lord is sun and shield, the Lord gives grace and glory. He withholds no good thing from the life that is blameless.
PSA 84:12 Lord of hosts, happy those whose trust is in you.
PSA 85:1 For the leader. Of the Korahites, a psalm. Once, Lord, you did favour your land, granting change of fortune to Jacob,
PSA 85:2 forgiving the guilt of your people, pardoning all their sin, Selah
PSA 85:3 withdrawing all your fury, turning from your hot anger.
PSA 85:4 Restore us, O God our saviour, put away your displeasure against us.
PSA 85:5 Will you cherish your anger against us forever, prolonging your wrath to all generations?
PSA 85:6 Will you not revive us again, that your people may be glad in you?
PSA 85:7 Show us your kindness, O Lord, grant us your salvation.
PSA 85:8 Let me hear what God the Lord will speak; for he will speak of peace to his people, to those who love him, and turn their hearts to him.
PSA 85:9 Soon those who fear him shall see how he saves, and glory shall live in our land.
PSA 85:10 Kindness and loyalty meet; peace and righteousness kiss.
PSA 85:11 Loyalty springs from the earth; righteousness looks from the sky.
PSA 85:12 The Lord shall give all that is good, our land yielding its increase,
PSA 85:13 righteousness marching before him, and peace on the path he treads.
PSA 86:1 A prayer of David. Incline your ear, Lord, and answer me, for I am afflicted and needy.
PSA 86:2 Guard me, for I am loyal: save your servant, who trusts in you.
PSA 86:3 Lord, be gracious to me, for you are my God; I cry to you all the day.
PSA 86:4 Gladden the heart of your servant; for to you, Lord, I set my hope.
PSA 86:5 For you, Lord, are good and forgiving, rich in love towards all who call on you.
PSA 86:6 Listen, O Lord, to my prayer; attend to my plea for mercy.
PSA 86:7 In the day of my trouble I call on you, with assurance that you will answer me.
PSA 86:8 None of the gods is like you, Lord, nor are any works like yours.
PSA 86:9 All the nations you have made will come and bow down before you, giving glory, O Lord, to your name.
PSA 86:10 For great are you, and a doer of wonders; you alone are God.
PSA 86:11 Teach me, O Lord, your way, that I may walk in your truth: so my heart shall rejoice in your name.
PSA 86:12 I will give you thanks, O Lord, with all my heart, my God, I will honour your name forever.
PSA 86:13 For great is your love towards me, from the depths of Sheol you have saved me.
PSA 86:14 Haughty men have risen up against me, O God, a band of the violent seeking my life, who think nothing of you.
PSA 86:15 But you are a God of pity and grace, patient and rich in kindness and faithfulness; turn to me with your grace, O Lord.
PSA 86:16 Grant your strength to your servant, and save the child of your handmaid.
PSA 86:17 Show me a sign of your favour, which those who hate me may see with confusion, since you, Lord, are my helper and comforter.
PSA 87:1 Of the Korahites, a psalm. A song. On the holy mountain stands the city he founded.
PSA 87:2 The Lord loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
PSA 87:3 Glorious things he is speaking of you, you city of God. Selah
PSA 87:4 ‘Among those who are mine I name Rahab and Babylon, Philistia, Tyre, Ethiopia, their people will say I was born in Zion.
PSA 87:5 As for Zion it will be said each and all were born in her.’ The Lord will preserve her.
PSA 87:6 The Lord will count, when enrolling the peoples, ‘This one was born there, and that one was born there.’ Selah
PSA 87:7 Singers and dancers alike will say ‘All my springs are in you.’
PSA 88:1 A Song, a psalm of the Korahites. To the leader: according to Mahalath Leannoth. A Maskil of Heman the Ezrahite. O Lord my God, I cry for help in the day-time, in the night my cry is before you;
PSA 88:2 let my prayer come into your presence, incline your ear to my cry.
PSA 88:3 For I am sated with sorrow, my life draws near to Sheol.
PSA 88:4 I am counted with those who go down to the pit; without strength am I.
PSA 88:5 My home is among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom you remember no more cut off as they are from your hand.
PSA 88:6 In the deepest pit you have put me, in shadows deep and dark.
PSA 88:7 Your wrath lies heavy upon me, waves of your anger roll over me. Selah
PSA 88:8 You have put my friends far from me, you have made them shun me. I am shut in, and cannot escape,
PSA 88:9 my eyes are wasted with sorrow. I call on you, Lord, every day, spreading my hands out to you.
PSA 88:10 For the dead can you work wonders? Can the shades rise again to praise you? Selah
PSA 88:11 Can your kindness be told in the grave, your faithfulness in the tomb?
PSA 88:12 Can your wonders be known in the darkness, or your help in the land of forgetfulness?
PSA 88:13 I cry for help to you, in the morning my prayer comes before you.
PSA 88:14 Why, O Lord, do you spurn me, and hide your face from me?
PSA 88:15 From my youth I am wretched and dying, I am numbed by the terrors I bear.
PSA 88:16 The fires of your wrath have passed over me, your terrors destroy me,
PSA 88:17 surging around me forever, hemming me in altogether.
PSA 88:18 Those who love me you put far from me; the dark is my only friend.
PSA 89:1 A Maskil of Ethan the Ezrahite. I will sing evermore of the love of the Lord, proclaiming to all generations his faithfulness.
PSA 89:2 For your love you did promise to build up forever, your faithfulness firm as the heavens themselves.
PSA 89:3 ‘I have made with my chosen a covenant, and sworn to David my servant,
PSA 89:4 to establish his seed forever, and to build up his throne to all ages.’ Selah
PSA 89:5 Then the holy assembly in heaven praised your marvellous faithfulness, Lord.
PSA 89:6 For who in the skies may compare with the Lord? Who is like the Lord among the gods?
PSA 89:7 A God to be feared in the holy assembly, awful and great above all who are round him.
PSA 89:8 O Lord God of hosts, who is mighty as you? Your strength and faithfulness, Lord, surround you.
PSA 89:9 You are the Lord of the raging sea: when its waves surge, it is you who still them.
PSA 89:10 It was you who did pierce and crush Rahab in pieces, and scatter your foes by your mighty arm.
PSA 89:11 Yours are the heavens, yours also the earth, the world and its fulness, it’s you who did found them.
PSA 89:12 The north and the south, it’s you have created them; Tabor and Hermon shout praise to your name.
PSA 89:13 You have an arm with the might of a hero; strong is your hand, high uplifted your right hand.
PSA 89:14 Justice and right are the base of your throne, kindness and faithfulness ever attend you.
PSA 89:15 Happy the people who know the glad shout, who walk, O Lord, in the light of your face.
PSA 89:16 They exult in your name all the day, and your righteousness they extol.
PSA 89:17 For you are our strength and our pride. Your favour will lift us to honour.
PSA 89:18 For the holy Lord of Israel keeps our defender and king.
PSA 89:19 In a vision of old you did speak in this way to the one whom you loved: ‘A crown I have set on the hero I chose to be over the people
PSA 89:20 ‘I found my servant David, and anointed with holy oil.
PSA 89:21 My hand will be with him forever, my arm will give him strength.
PSA 89:22 ‘No enemy will dare to assail him, nor the wicked to oppress him;
PSA 89:23 but his foes I will shatter before him, I will strike down those who hate him.
PSA 89:24 ‘My loyal love shall attend him, and I will lift him to honour.
PSA 89:25 I will set his hand on the sea, and his right hand on the rivers.
PSA 89:26 ‘As for him, he will call me “My father, my God, and my rock of salvation.”
PSA 89:27 And I will make him my firstborn, highest of kings on the earth.
PSA 89:28 ‘My love will I keep for him ever, my covenant with him shall stand fast.
PSA 89:29 His line will I make everlasting, and his throne as the days of the heavens.
PSA 89:30 ‘If his children forsake my law, and walk not as I have ordained;
PSA 89:31 if they profane my statutes, and do not keep my commandments;
PSA 89:32 ‘I will punish their sin with the rod, their iniquity with scourges.
PSA 89:33 But my love will I not take from him, nor will I belie my faithfulness.
PSA 89:34 ‘I will not profane my covenant by changing the word that has passed my lips.
PSA 89:35 Once have I solemnly sworn and I would not lie to David,
PSA 89:36 ‘that his line should endure forever, and his throne as the sun before me,
PSA 89:37 firm as the moon which for ever and ever is fixed in the sky.’ Selah
PSA 89:38 But you have cast off in contempt, and been furious with your anointed.
PSA 89:39 You have spurned the covenant with your servant, and his sacred crown dashed to the ground.
PSA 89:40 You have broken down all his walls, and laid his bulwarks in ruins.
PSA 89:41 All who pass on their way despoil him, the scorn of his neighbours is he now.
PSA 89:42 You have given his foes the victory, and made all his enemies glad.
PSA 89:43 You have turned back his sword from the foe, you did not lift him up in the battle.
PSA 89:44 The sceptre you took from his hand, and his throne you did hurl to the ground.
PSA 89:45 You have shortened the days of his youth, and covered him with shame. Selah
PSA 89:46 How long, Lord will you hide you forever? How long are the fires of your wrath to burn?
PSA 89:47 Remember, Lord, the shortness of life how fleeting you made all people.
PSA 89:48 Who can live without seeing death? Who can rescue their life from the clutch of Sheol? Selah
PSA 89:49 Where, Lord, is your kindness of old, which you in your faithfulness swore to David?
PSA 89:50 Remember, O Lord, how your servants are mocked, how I bear in my heart the scorn of all nations
PSA 89:51 The scorn which your enemies hurl, O Lord, which they hurl at the footsteps of your anointed.
PSA 89:52 Blest be the Lord, for ever and ever. Amen and Amen.
PSA 90:1 A prayer of Moses, the man of God. Lord, you have been a home to us one generation after another.
PSA 90:2 Before the mountains were born, or the earth and the world were brought forth, from everlasting to everlasting you are God.
PSA 90:3 You bring us back to the dust, you summon mortals to return.
PSA 90:4 For you see a thousand years as the passing of yesterday, as a watch in the night.
PSA 90:5 Your floods sweep them away; they are like a dream, or like grass which sprouts in the morning,
PSA 90:6 which blossoms and sprouts in the morning, but by evening is cut and withered.
PSA 90:7 For your anger consumes us, the heat of your wrath confounds us.
PSA 90:8 Our sins you have set before you, our secrets in the light of your face.
PSA 90:9 For through your wrath our days are declining, we bring our years to an end as a sigh.
PSA 90:10 The span of our life is seventy years, or, if we are strong, maybe eighty; yet is their breadth but empty toil, for swiftly they go, and we fly away.
PSA 90:11 Who lays to heart the power of your anger? Or who stands in reverent awe of your wrath?
PSA 90:12 O teach us to count our days so our minds may learn wisdom.
PSA 90:13 Return, O Lord; why so long? Relent on your servants.
PSA 90:14 Grant us your love to the full in the morning, that all our days we may shout for joy.
PSA 90:15 Make us glad for the days you have humbled us, for the evil years we have seen.
PSA 90:16 Let your servants see you in action, show your majesty to their children.
PSA 90:17 Let the grace of the Lord our God be upon us, uphold what our hands are striving to do.
PSA 91:1 You whose home is the shelter of God Most High, whose abode is the shadow of God Almighty,
PSA 91:2 can say to the Lord, ‘My refuge, my fortress, my God, in whom I trust.’
PSA 91:3 For he saves you from fowler’s snare, from deadly plague,
PSA 91:4 he shelters you with his pinions, and under his wings you can hide. His truth will be a shield and buckler.
PSA 91:5 You need not fear the terror of night, nor the arrow that flies by day,
PSA 91:6 nor the plague that stalks in darkness, nor the pestilence raging at noon.
PSA 91:7 A thousand may fall at your side, ten thousand at your right hand: but it will not draw near to you.
PSA 91:8 You will only look on with your eyes, and see how the wicked are punished.
PSA 91:9 You have made the Lord your refuge, you have made the Most High your defence.
PSA 91:10 You will never be met by misfortune, no plague will come near your tent,
PSA 91:11 for he orders his angels to guard you, wherever you go.
PSA 91:12 They will carry you with their hands, so you don’t hurt your foot on a stone.
PSA 91:13 You will trample down lions and snakes, tread on young lions and cobras.
PSA 91:14 ‘Because of their love for me, I will deliver them, I will protect those who trust my name.
PSA 91:15 I will answer their cry and be with them in trouble, bringing them forth into safety and honour.
PSA 91:16 I will give them a life of many days, I will show them my salvation.’
PSA 92:1 A psalm. A song; for the sabbath day. It is good to give thanks to the Lord, to sing praise to your name, O Most High,
PSA 92:2 to declare your love in the morning, and your faithfulness in the night,
PSA 92:3 with voice and a ten-stringed harp, with music that throbs on the lyre.
PSA 92:4 For you make me glad by your deeds, Lord, at the work of your hands I will ring out my joy.
PSA 92:5 How great are your works, O Lord; how deep are your thoughts!
PSA 92:6 The insensitive cannot know, nor can a fool understand,
PSA 92:7 that, though the wicked flourish like grass, and evildoers all blossom, they will perish forever.
PSA 92:8 But you are exalted forever.
PSA 92:9 For see! Your enemies, Lord For see! Your enemies perish, all evildoers are scattered.
PSA 92:10 But you lift me to honour, and anoint me afresh with oil.
PSA 92:11 My eyes will feast on my foes, and my ears will hear of the doom of the wicked.
PSA 92:12 The righteous will sprout like the palm, will grow like a cedar of Lebanon.
PSA 92:13 In the house of the Lord are they planted, in the courts of our God they will sprout.
PSA 92:14 They will still bear fruit in old age, all sappy and fresh will they be
PSA 92:15 So they proclaim the Lord to be just, my rock, in whom is no wrong.
PSA 93:1 The Lord has taken his seat on the throne, clothed with majesty, armed with might. Now the world stands firm, to be shaken no more,
PSA 93:2 firm stands your throne from all eternity. You are from everlasting.
PSA 93:3 The floods, O Lord, have lifted, the floods have lifted their voice, the floods lift up their roar.
PSA 93:4 But more grand than the great roaring waters, more grand than the ocean waves, grand on the height stands the Lord.
PSA 93:5 What you have ordained is most sure; most sure shall your house stand inviolate, O Lord, for ever and ever.
PSA 94:1 Lord, God of vengeance, God of vengeance, shine forth.
PSA 94:2 Rise up, judge of the earth, pay back the proud what they deserve.
PSA 94:3 Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked exult,
PSA 94:4 with their blustering arrogant words, their braggart and wicked speech,
PSA 94:5 crushing your people, Lord, and afflicting your heritage,
PSA 94:6 murdering widows and strangers, slaying the fatherless?
PSA 94:7 They think that the Lord does not see, nor the God of Jacob regard it.
PSA 94:8 Take heed, you dullest of people; when will you be wise, you fools?
PSA 94:9 Is he deaf, who shaped the ear? Is he blind, who fashioned the eye?
PSA 94:10 Can he who trains nations not punish them he who teaches knowledge to people?
PSA 94:11 The Lord knows the thoughts of people, that only a breath are they.
PSA 94:12 Happy are those whom you chasten, and teach out of your law,
PSA 94:13 keeping them calm in the day of misfortune, till a pit be dug for the wicked.
PSA 94:14 For the Lord will not leave his people, he will not forsake his inheritance.
PSA 94:15 For the righteous shall come to their rights, and all true-hearted people shall follow them.
PSA 94:16 Who will rise up for me against those who do evil? Who will stand up for me against workers of wrong?
PSA 94:17 Were it not for the help of the Lord, I would soon have gone to the silent grave.
PSA 94:18 When I thought that my foot was slipping, your kindness, Lord, held me up.
PSA 94:19 When with cares my heart was crowded, your comforts make me glad.
PSA 94:20 Can corrupt justice be your ally, framing mischief by statute?
PSA 94:21 They assail the life of the righteous, and innocent blood condemn.
PSA 94:22 But the Lord is my sure retreat, my God is the rock of my refuge.
PSA 94:23 He will bring back their sin upon them, for their wickedness he will destroy them; the Lord our God will destroy them.
PSA 95:1 Come! Let us ring out our joy to the Lord, let us merrily shout to our rock of salvation.
PSA 95:2 Before his face let us come with thanks, with songs of praise let us shout to him.
PSA 95:3 For the Lord is a great God, king above all gods.
PSA 95:4 In his hand are the depths of the earth, the heights of the mountains are his.
PSA 95:5 The sea is his, for he made it: the dry land was formed by his hands.
PSA 95:6 Come! Let us worship and bow on our knees to the Lord our creator.
PSA 95:7 For he is our God; and we are the people he tends, the sheep in his care. If only you would heed his voice today:
PSA 95:8 ‘Do not harden your hearts as at Meribah, or at Massah, that day in the desert,
PSA 95:9 when your ancestors tempted and tried me, though they had seen my deeds.
PSA 95:10 ‘For forty years I was filled with loathing for that generation, so I said: “A people with wandering hearts are they, and ignorant of my ways.”
PSA 95:11 So I solemnly swore to them in my anger, that never would they enter my place of rest.’
PSA 96:1 Sing to the Lord a new song, sing to the Lord, all the earth.
PSA 96:2 Sing to the Lord, bless his name, from day to day herald his victory.
PSA 96:3 Tell his glory among the nations, his wonders among all peoples.
PSA 96:4 For great is the Lord and worthy all praise; held in awe, above all gods:
PSA 96:5 for all the gods of the nations are idols, but the Lord created the heavens.
PSA 96:6 Before him are splendour and majesty, beauty and strength in his holy place.
PSA 96:7 Ascribe to the Lord, you tribes of the nations, ascribe to the Lord glory and strength.
PSA 96:8 Ascribe to the Lord the glory he manifests: bring you an offering, enter his courts.
PSA 96:9 Bow to the Lord in holy array: tremble before him, all the earth.
PSA 96:10 Say to the nations, ‘The Lord is king.’ The world stands firm to be shaken no more. He will judge the peoples with equity.
PSA 96:11 Let the heavens be glad and the earth rejoice, let the sea and its fulness thunder.
PSA 96:12 Let the field, and all that is in it, exult; let the trees of the forest ring out their joy
PSA 96:13 before the Lord: for he comes, he comes to judge the earth. He will judge the world with justice and the nations with faithfulness.
PSA 97:1 The Lord is king, let the earth rejoice: let her many isles be glad.
PSA 97:2 Clouds and darkness are round about him, justice and right are the base of his throne.
PSA 97:3 Fire goes before him, and blazes around his steps,
PSA 97:4 his lightnings illumine the world: the earth quakes at the sight.
PSA 97:5 Mountains melt like wax before the Lord of all the earth.
PSA 97:6 The heavens proclaim his justice, all nations behold his glory.
PSA 97:7 Shamed are all image-worshippers, who make a boast of their idols. All the gods bow before him.
PSA 97:8 Zion is glad at the tidings, the towns of Judah rejoice because of your judgments, Lord.
PSA 97:9 For you are most high over all the earth, greatly exalted above all gods.
PSA 97:10 The Lord loves those who hate evil, he guards the lives of the faithful: from the hand of the wicked he saves them.
PSA 97:11 Light arises for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart.
PSA 97:12 Rejoice in the Lord, you righteous: give thanks to his holy name.
PSA 98:1 A psalm. Sing a new song to the Lord, for he has done wonders; his right hand and holy arm have won him the victory.
PSA 98:2 The Lord has made his victory known, and revealed to the eyes of the nations his righteousness.
PSA 98:3 Mindful he was of his kindness to Jacob, faithful he was to the house of Israel. All the ends of the earth have seen the victory of our God.
PSA 98:4 Shout, all the earth, to the Lord: break into cries and music.
PSA 98:5 Play on the lyre to the Lord, on the lyre and with loud melody.
PSA 98:6 With trumpet and sound of horn, shout before the king.
PSA 98:7 Let the sea and its fulness roar, the world and the dwellers upon it.
PSA 98:8 Let the streams clap their hands, let the hills shout for gladness together
PSA 98:9 before the Lord for he comes, he comes to judge the earth. He will judge the world with justice and the nations with equity.
PSA 99:1 The Lord is king; let the nations tremble: he is throned upon cherubs; let earth quake.
PSA 99:2 The Lord is great in Zion, he is high over all the nations.
PSA 99:3 Let them praise your great and terrible name. Holy is he.
PSA 99:4 You are a king who loves justice, equity you have established: justice and right you have wrought for Jacob.
PSA 99:5 Exalt the Lord our God, bow down at his footstool. Holy is he.
PSA 99:6 Among his priests were Moses and Aaron, Samuel among those who called on his name. They called to the Lord, and he gave them answer.
PSA 99:7 He spoke to them in the pillar of cloud, they kept his commands and the statute he gave them.
PSA 99:8 Lord our God, you gave them answer. A God of forgiveness were you to them, who suffered their deeds to go unpunished.
PSA 99:9 Exalt the Lord our God; bow down at his holy mountain. For holy is the Lord our God.
PSA 100:1 A psalm of praise. Shout, all the earth, to the Lord.
PSA 100:2 Serve the Lord with gladness, approach him with ringing cries.
PSA 100:3 Be sure that the Lord alone is God. It is he who has made us, and his we are his people, the sheep of his pasture.
PSA 100:4 Enter his gates with thanksgiving, his courts with praise. Give thanks to him, bless his name.
PSA 100:5 For the Lord is good, his love is forever, and to all ages endures his faithfulness.
PSA 101:1 Of David, a psalm. If kindness and justice I sing, making melody to you, Lord.
PSA 101:2 I would look to the way that is blameless, and make it my own. Within my own house I would walk with an innocent heart.
PSA 101:3 I would never direct my eyes to a thing that is base. The impulse to stray I abhor it shall not cling to me.
PSA 101:4 Far from me be perverseness of heart, or kinship with evil.
PSA 101:5 Who slanders their neighbour in secret, I bring them to silence: haughty looks and proud hearts I will not abide.
PSA 101:6 I will favour the true in the land, they shall live in my court. Those who walk in a way that is blameless will be my attendant.
PSA 101:7 No one will live in my house who practises guile. No one that speaks a lie will abide in my presence.
PSA 101:8 Morn by morn I will wholly wipe out all the bad in the land, and cut off from the Lord’s own city all workers of evil.
PSA 102:1 The prayer: for a weary and suffering person who pours out their grief to the Lord. Hear my prayer, O Lord; let my cry for help come to you.
PSA 102:2 Hide not your face from me in the day of my distress. Incline your ear to me: when I call, answer me speedily.
PSA 102:3 For my days pass away like smoke: my bones are burned through as with fire.
PSA 102:4 My heart is scorched, withered like grass; I forget to eat my bread.
PSA 102:5 By reason of my loud groaning, my flesh clings to my bones.
PSA 102:6 Like a desert-owl of the wilderness, like an owl among ruins am I.
PSA 102:7 I make my sleepless lament like a bird on the house-top alone.
PSA 102:8 All the day wild foes revile me, using my name for a curse.
PSA 102:9 For ashes have been my bread, and tears have been mixed with my cup.
PSA 102:10 Because of your passionate anger, you did raise me, then hurl me to the ground.
PSA 102:11 My days come to an end, shadows lengthen, I wither like grass.
PSA 102:12 But you, O Lord, are enthroned forever, your fame endures to all generations.
PSA 102:13 You will arise and have pity on Zion; it’s time to be gracious; her hour has come.
PSA 102:14 For even her stones are dear to your servants, even the dust of her ruins they look on with love.
PSA 102:15 Then the nations will revere the name of the Lord and all the kings of the earth his glory,
PSA 102:16 when the Lord shall have built up Zion, and revealed himself in his glory,
PSA 102:17 in response to the prayer of the destitute, whose prayer he will not despise.
PSA 102:18 Let this be recorded for ages to come, that the Lord may be praised by a people yet unborn.
PSA 102:19 For he shall look down from his holy height, from the heavens the Lord will gaze on the earth,
PSA 102:20 to hear the groans of the prisoner, to free those who are doomed to die;
PSA 102:21 that people may recount the Lord’s fame in Zion, and the praise of him in Jerusalem,
PSA 102:22 when the nations are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to worship the Lord.
PSA 102:23 He has broken my strength on the way, he has shortened my days.
PSA 102:24 I will say, ‘My God, take me not hence in the midst of my days. ‘Your years endure age after age.
PSA 102:25 Of old you have founded the earth, and the heavens are the work of your hands.
PSA 102:26 They shall perish; but you do stand. They shall all wax old like a garment, and change as a robe you will change them.
PSA 102:27 But you are the same, your years are endless.
PSA 102:28 The children of your servants abide, evermore shall their seed be before you.’
PSA 103:1 Of David. O my soul, bless the Lord; and all that is in me, his holy name.
PSA 103:2 O my soul, bless the Lord; and forget not one of his benefits.
PSA 103:3 He pardons all your sins, he heals all your diseases.
PSA 103:4 He ransoms your life from the pit, he crowns you with kindness and pity.
PSA 103:5 He gives you your heart’s desire, renewing your youth like the eagle’s.
PSA 103:6 The Lord executes justice – and right for all who are wronged.
PSA 103:7 He revealed his ways to Moses, his acts to the children of Israel.
PSA 103:8 Full of pity and grace is the Lord, patient, and rich in kindness:
PSA 103:9 he will not always chide, nor cherish his anger forever.
PSA 103:10 Not after our sins has he dealt with us, nor requited us after our wickedness.
PSA 103:11 For high as the heavens o’er the earth is his love over those who fear him.
PSA 103:12 Far as is east from the west has he put our transgressions from us.
PSA 103:13 As a father pities his children, so the Lord pities those who fear him;
PSA 103:14 for well he knows our frame, he remembers that we are dust.
PSA 103:15 A person’s days are as grass; blossoms like a flower of the meadow.
PSA 103:16 At the breath of the wind it is gone, and the place thereof knows it no more.
PSA 103:17 But the love of the Lord is eternal, and his kindness to children’s children,
PSA 103:18 to those who keep his covenant and mindfully do his behests.
PSA 103:19 The Lord has set his throne in the heavens; the whole world is under his sway.
PSA 103:20 Bless the Lord, you angels of his, mighty heroes performing his word.
PSA 103:21 Bless the Lord, all you his hosts, you servants who do his will.
PSA 103:22 Bless the Lord, all you his works, far as his sway extends. O my soul, bless the Lord.
PSA 104:1 Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, you are very great, clad in awful splendour,
PSA 104:2 covered with robe of light. You stretch out the heavens like the cloth of a tent.
PSA 104:3 He lays the beams of his chambers on water. He takes dark clouds for his chariot, and rides on the wings of the wind.
PSA 104:4 He takes the winds for his messengers, the fire and the flame for his servants.
PSA 104:5 He founded the earth upon pillars, to sustain it unshaken forever.
PSA 104:6 With the garment of ocean he covered it, waters towered over the mountains.
PSA 104:7 But at your rebuke they fled, scared by the roar of your thunder,
PSA 104:8 mountains rose, valleys sank down to the place appointed for them.
PSA 104:9 They dared not pass the bounds set for them, or cover the earth any more.
PSA 104:10 He sent brooks into the valleys, they meander between the mountains.
PSA 104:11 The wild beasts all drink from them, and the wild asses quench their thirst.
PSA 104:12 The birds have their home by the banks, and sing in the branches.
PSA 104:13 From his chambers above he gives drink to the mountains, and satisfies earth with the vials of heaven.
PSA 104:14 He makes grass grow for the cattle, and herbs for people. He brings bread out of the earth;
PSA 104:15 wine, to gladden hearts; oil, to make faces shine; bread, to strengthen hearts.
PSA 104:16 The trees of the Lord drink their fill the cedars he planted on Lebanon,
PSA 104:17 where the little birds build their nest, and the stork whose home is the cypress.
PSA 104:18 The high hills are for the wild goats, and the rocks are for coneys to hide in.
PSA 104:19 He created the moon to mark seasons, and told the sun when to set.
PSA 104:20 You make it dark: night comes, when all the wild beasts creep out.
PSA 104:21 Young lions that roar for their prey, seeking their meat from God.
PSA 104:22 At sunrise they slink away, and lie down in their dens.
PSA 104:23 Then people go forth to their work, and toil till evening.
PSA 104:24 How many, O Lord, are your works, all of them made in wisdom! The earth is filled with your creatures.
PSA 104:25 And there is the great broad sea, where are countless things in motion, living creatures, both great and small.
PSA 104:26 There go the ships, and the Leviathan you made to play there.
PSA 104:27 They all look in hope to you, to give them their food in due season.
PSA 104:28 And you give with open hand; they gather and eat to their heart’s desire.
PSA 104:29 When you hide your face, they are terrified; when you take their breath away, they die and go back to their dust.
PSA 104:30 But a breath from your lips creates them, and renews the face of the earth.
PSA 104:31 May the glory of the Lord be forever, may the Lord rejoice in his works.
PSA 104:32 A glance of his makes the earth tremble, a touch of his makes the hills smoke.
PSA 104:33 I will sing to the Lord while I live, I will play to my God while I am.
PSA 104:34 May my musing be sweet to him, for I rejoice in the Lord.
PSA 104:35 But may sinners be swept from the earth, and the wicked vanish forever. O my soul, bless the Lord. Hallelujah.
PSA 105:1 Give thanks to the Lord, call on his name: make known his deeds among the nations.
PSA 105:2 Sing to him, make music to him, tell of all his wondrous works.
PSA 105:3 Make your boast in his holy name, be glad at heart, you who seek the Lord.
PSA 105:4 Seek after the Lord and his strength, seek his face evermore.
PSA 105:5 Remember the wonders he did, his portents, the judgments he uttered,
PSA 105:6 you who are offspring of Abraham, his servant, the children of Jacob, his chosen ones.
PSA 105:7 He is the Lord our God: in all the earth are his judgments.
PSA 105:8 He remembers forever his covenant, his promise for a thousand generations
PSA 105:9 The covenant he made with Abraham, the oath he swore to Isaac,
PSA 105:10 and confirmed as a statute to Jacob, a pact everlasting to Israel
PSA 105:11 to give them the land of Canaan as the lot which they should inherit.
PSA 105:12 And when they were very few, few and but pilgrims therein,
PSA 105:13 wandering from nation to nation, journeying from people to people,
PSA 105:14 he allowed no one to oppress them, even punishing kings for their sakes.
PSA 105:15 He forbade them to touch his anointed, or do any hurt to his prophets.
PSA 105:16 When he called down famine on the land, and cut off the bread which sustained them,
PSA 105:17 he sent before them a man, Joseph, who was sold as a slave.
PSA 105:18 His feet were galled with fetters, he was laid in chains of iron,
PSA 105:19 till the time that his word came to pass, the word of the Lord that had tried him.
PSA 105:20 The king sent and freed him, the ruler of nations released him.
PSA 105:21 He made him lord of his household, and ruler of all his possessions,
PSA 105:22 to admonish his princes at will and instruct his elders in wisdom.
PSA 105:23 Thus Israel came into Egypt, Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
PSA 105:24 His people he made very fruitful, and mightier than their foes.
PSA 105:25 He inspired them to hate his people, and to deal with his servants craftily.
PSA 105:26 He sent his servant Moses, and Aaron whom he had chosen,
PSA 105:27 portents he wrought in Egypt, and signs in the land of Ham.
PSA 105:28 Darkness he sent, and it fell: yet they gave no heed to his word.
PSA 105:29 He turned their waters into blood, thus causing their fish to die.
PSA 105:30 Their land was alive with frogs, swarming even in the royal chambers.
PSA 105:31 At his command came flies, and lice in all their borders.
PSA 105:32 He gave them hail for rain and fire that flashed through the land,
PSA 105:33 smiting their vines and figs, breaking the trees of their border.
PSA 105:34 At his command came locusts, young locusts beyond all counting,
PSA 105:35 which ate every herb in the land, ate up, too, the fruit of their ground.
PSA 105:36 He struck down in their land all the firstborn, the firstlings of all their strength
PSA 105:37 Then forth he led Israel with silver and gold, and among his tribes no one was weary.
PSA 105:38 Egypt was glad when they left, for terror had fallen upon them.
PSA 105:39 He spread out a cloud to screen them, and fire to give light in the night.
PSA 105:40 He sent quails at their entreaty, and heavenly bread in abundance.
PSA 105:41 He opened the rock; waters gushed: in the desert they ran like a river.
PSA 105:42 For he remembered his holy promise to Abraham his servant.
PSA 105:43 So he led out his people with joy, his elect with a ringing cry.
PSA 105:44 And he gave them the lands of the nations, the fruit of their toil for possession,
PSA 105:45 that so they might keep his statutes, and be of his laws observant. Hallelujah.
PSA 106:1 Hallelujah! Give thanks to the Lord for his goodness, for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 106:2 Who can describe his heroic deeds, or publish all his praise?
PSA 106:3 Happy they who act justly, and do righteousness evermore.
PSA 106:4 Remember me, Lord, as you remember your people, and visit me with your gracious help.
PSA 106:5 May I see the good fortune of your elect, may I share in the joy of your nation, and in the pride of your heritage.
PSA 106:6 We, like our fathers, have sinned, we have done perversely and wickedly
PSA 106:7 In the land of Egypt our fathers, all heedless of your wonders, and unmindful of your great kindness, at the Red Sea defied the Most High.
PSA 106:8 But true to his name he saved them, in order to show his might.
PSA 106:9 He rebuked the Red Sea, and it dried; they marched through the depths as through desert,
PSA 106:10 saved from the hand of the hostile, redeemed from the hand of the foe.
PSA 106:11 The waters covered their enemies: not one of them was left.
PSA 106:12 So then they believed in his words, and began to sing his praise.
PSA 106:13 But soon they forgot his deeds: they did not wait for his counsel.
PSA 106:14 Their greed was ravenous in the desert; they put God to the test in the wilderness.
PSA 106:15 He gave them the thing they had asked for, but sent wasting disease among them.
PSA 106:16 The camp grew jealous of Moses and of Aaron, holy one of the Lord.
PSA 106:17 The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered Abiram’s company.
PSA 106:18 Fire broke out on their company, flame kindled upon the wicked.
PSA 106:19 They made a calf in Horeb, and bowed to the molten image.
PSA 106:20 They exchanged their glorious God for the image of ox that eats grass.
PSA 106:21 They forgot the God who had saved them by mighty deeds in Egypt
PSA 106:22 Wonders in the land of Ham, terrors by the Red Sea.
PSA 106:23 So he vowed, and would have destroyed them, but for Moses his elect, who stepped into the breach before him, to divert his deadly wrath.
PSA 106:24 They spurned the delightsome land, they refused to believe in his word.
PSA 106:25 They grumbled in their tents, would not listen to the voice of the Lord.
PSA 106:26 So he swore with uplifted hand to lay them low in the wilderness;
PSA 106:27 to disperse their seed among heathen, to scatter them over the world.
PSA 106:28 Then they joined them to Baal of Peor, and ate what was offered the dead.
PSA 106:29 They provoked him to wrath by their deeds, and plague broke out among them.
PSA 106:30 Then Phinehas stood between, and so the plague was stayed;
PSA 106:31 and it was counted to him for righteousness unto all generations forever.
PSA 106:32 They angered him at the waters of Meribah, through them it went ill with Moses.
PSA 106:33 They rebelled against his spirit, and he uttered speech that was rash.
PSA 106:34 They did not destroy the nations, as the Lord had commanded them;
PSA 106:35 but they mingled with the heathen, and learned to do as they did.
PSA 106:36 Their idol gods they worshipped, and they were ensnared by them.
PSA 106:37 They sacrificed their sons and their daughters to the demons.
PSA 106:38 They poured out innocent blood the blood of their sons and daughters whom they offered to Canaan’s idols, and the land was polluted with blood.
PSA 106:39 They became unclean by their works, and adulterous in their deeds.
PSA 106:40 Then the Lord’s fury was on his people, filled with horror at his inheritance.
PSA 106:41 He delivered them to the heathen, to the sway of those who hated them.
PSA 106:42 Their enemies oppressed them, and subdued them under their hand.
PSA 106:43 Many a time he saved them, but they rebelled at his counsel, and were brought low by their wrongdoing.
PSA 106:44 Yet he looked upon their distress, when he heard their cry.
PSA 106:45 He remembered his covenant, and, in his great kindness, relented.
PSA 106:46 He caused them to be pitied by all who carried them captive.
PSA 106:47 Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us out of the nations, to give thanks to your holy name, and to make our boast of your praise.
PSA 106:48 Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting. And let all the people say ‘Amen.’ Praise the Lord.
PSA 107:1 Give thanks to the Lord for his goodness for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 107:2 Let this be the song of the ransomed, whom the Lord has redeemed from distress,
PSA 107:3 gathering them from all lands, east, west, north, and south.
PSA 107:4 In the wastes of the desert some wandered, finding no way to a city inhabited.
PSA 107:5 Full of hunger and thirst, their spirit failed.
PSA 107:6 Then they cried to the Lord in their trouble, and he saved them from their distresses,
PSA 107:7 guiding them straight on the way, till they reached an inhabited city.
PSA 107:8 Let them thank the Lord for his kindness, for his wonderful deeds for people;
PSA 107:9 for the thirsty he satisfies, and the hungry he fills with good things.
PSA 107:10 Some sat in darkness and gloom prisoners in irons and misery,
PSA 107:11 for rebelling against God’s word, and spurning the Most High’s counsel.
PSA 107:12 Their heart was bowed with toil; there was no one to help when they stumbled.
PSA 107:13 Then they cried to the Lord in their trouble, and he saved them from their distresses.
PSA 107:14 Out of darkness and gloom he brought them, and burst their chains.
PSA 107:15 Let them praise the Lord for his kindness, for his wonderful deeds for people.
PSA 107:16 For he shattered the gates of bronze, and broke bars of iron.
PSA 107:17 Some were sick from their wicked ways, and suffering because of their sins.
PSA 107:18 All manner of food they hated; they had come to the gates of death.
PSA 107:19 Then they cried to the Lord in their trouble, and he saved them from their distresses.
PSA 107:20 He sent his word and healed them, and delivered their life from the pit.
PSA 107:21 Let them praise the Lord for his kindness, for his wonderful deeds for people.
PSA 107:22 Let them offer to him thankofferings, and with joy tell what things he has done.
PSA 107:23 Some crossed the sea in ships, doing business in great waters.
PSA 107:24 They have seen what the Lord can do, and his wonderful deeds on the deep.
PSA 107:25 At his command rose a tempest, which lifted the waves on high.
PSA 107:26 Up to heaven they went, down to the depths; their courage failed them.
PSA 107:27 They staggered and reeled like drunkards; all their skills useless.
PSA 107:28 Then they cried to the Lord in their trouble, and he saved them from their distresses.
PSA 107:29 He stilled the storm to a whisper, and the waves of the sea were hushed.
PSA 107:30 They were glad, because it was quiet; they were led to the haven they longed for.
PSA 107:31 Let them praise the Lord, for his kindness, for his wonderful deeds for people.
PSA 107:32 Where the people assemble, extol him, and praise him in council of elders.
PSA 107:33 He turns streams into a wilderness, springs of water into thirsty land,
PSA 107:34 fruitful land into a salt waste, because of the sin of the people.
PSA 107:35 A desert he makes pools of water, a land of drought into springs of water.
PSA 107:36 He settles the hungry therein, they establish a city to live in.
PSA 107:37 They sow fields and plant vineyards, which furnish a fruitful yield.
PSA 107:38 By his blessing they multiply greatly, and he lets not their cattle decrease.
PSA 107:39 Yet when they are bowed and diminished by oppression, misfortune, or sorrow,
PSA 107:40 he pours contempt upon princes, and on trackless wastes leads them astray
PSA 107:41 He lifts the poor out of misery, and makes families fruitful as flocks.
PSA 107:42 At this sight shall the upright be glad, and all wicked mouths shall be stopped.
PSA 107:43 Let those who are wise observe this, and consider the love of the Lord
PSA 108:1 A song. A psalm of David. My heart is steadfast, O God, my heart is steadfast. I would sing, I would make music; awake, my soul.
PSA 108:2 Awake, harp and lyre; I would wake the dawn.
PSA 108:3 I would praise you among the peoples, O Lord; make music among the nations to you.
PSA 108:4 For great to heaven is your love, and your faithfulness to the clouds.
PSA 108:5 Be exalted, O God, o’er the heavens, and your glory o’er all the earth.
PSA 108:6 So those you love may be rescued, save by your right hand and answer us.
PSA 108:7 God did solemnly swear: ‘As victor will I divide Shechem, portion out the valley of Succoth.
PSA 108:8 Mine is Gilead, mine is Manasseh, Ephraim is my helmet, Judah my sceptre of rule,
PSA 108:9 Moab the pot that I wash in, on Edom I hurl my sandal, I shout o’er Philistia in triumph.’
PSA 108:10 O to be brought to the fortified city! O to be led into Edom!
PSA 108:11 Have you not spurned us, O God? You do not march forth with our armies.
PSA 108:12 Grant us help from the foe, for human help is worthless.
PSA 108:13 With God we shall yet do bravely, he himself will tread down our foes.
PSA 109:1 For the leader. Of David, a psalm. O God whom I praise, keep not silence;
PSA 109:2 for their wicked mouths they have opened against me, they speak to me with tongues that are false,
PSA 109:3 they beset me with words of hatred, and fight without cause against me.
PSA 109:4 My love they requite with hostility, while for them I lift up my prayer.
PSA 109:5 Evil for good they reward me, and hatred for my love.
PSA 109:6 ‘Set over him one who is godless,’ they say, ‘an opponent at his right hand.
PSA 109:7 From his trial let him come forth guilty, may his prayer be counted as sin.
PSA 109:8 Grant that his days may be few, that his office be seized by another.
PSA 109:9 Grant that his children be fatherless, and that his wife be a widow.
PSA 109:10 Up and down may his children go begging, expelled from their desolate home.
PSA 109:11 May all that he owns be seized by the creditor may strangers plunder the fruits of his toil.
PSA 109:12 ‘May none extend to him kindness, or pity his fatherless children.
PSA 109:13 His descendants be doomed to destruction! Blotted out be his name in one generation!
PSA 109:14 May his father’s guilt be remembered, and his mother’s sin not blotted out:
PSA 109:15 on record always before the Lord, and his memory root from the earth;
PSA 109:16 for he gave no thought to show kindness, but pursued the poor and the needy, drove the downhearted to death.
PSA 109:17 ‘May the curses he loved light upon him, may the blessings he loathed be afar.
PSA 109:18 Like a garment he clothed him with curses; may they pierce to his inwards like water, and cling to his bones like oil.
PSA 109:19 Let them be like the robe he wraps round him, like the belt he wears every day.’
PSA 109:20 Be this the reward of my adversaries, of those who speak evil against me.
PSA 109:21 But you, Lord my God, be true to your name, deal kindly with me; in your gracious kindness save me.
PSA 109:22 For I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.
PSA 109:23 I am gone like a lengthening shadow, I am shaken off like a locust.
PSA 109:24 My knees totter from fasting, my flesh is shrivelled and spare.
PSA 109:25 They heap insults upon me: when they see me, they shake their head.
PSA 109:26 Help me, O Lord my God, and save me in your kindness.
PSA 109:27 Teach them that this is your hand, and your own doing, O Lord.
PSA 109:28 Let them curse, if only you bless. Put my assailants to shame, and make your servant glad.
PSA 109:29 My opponents be clothed with dishonour, and wrapped in a robe of shame.
PSA 109:30 I give thanks to you, Lord, with loud voice, I give praise in the midst of the throng;
PSA 109:31 for he stands by the poor, at his right hand, to save them from those who condemn them.
PSA 110:1 Of David, a psalm. This said the Lord concerning my lord, ‘Sit at my right hand, till I set your foot on the neck of your foes.’
PSA 110:2 On Zion the Lord is wielding your sceptre of might, and charges you to rule over the foes that surround you.
PSA 110:3 The day that you march to battle your people will follow you gladly young warriors in holy array, like dew-drops, born of the morning.
PSA 110:4 The Lord has sworn and will not repent, ‘As for you, you are priest for ever as Melchizedek was.’
PSA 110:5 By your side will the Lord shatter kings on the day of his wrath.
PSA 110:6 He will execute judgment filling the valleys with dead, the broad fields with shattered heads.
PSA 110:7 He will drink of the brook by the way, and march onward with uplifted head.
PSA 111:1 Hallelujah. I will thank the Lord with all my heart, in the assembled congregation of his people.
PSA 111:2 Great are the things that the Lord has done, worthy of study by those who love them.
PSA 111:3 Majestic and glorious is his work, and his righteousness abides forever.
PSA 111:4 For his marvellous deeds he has won renown; the Lord is gracious and full of compassion.
PSA 111:5 Food he gives to those who fear him, always he remembers his covenant.
PSA 111:6 His mighty works he has shown to his people, in giving to them the nations for heritage.
PSA 111:7 All that he does is faithful and right, all his behests are firm and sure.
PSA 111:8 They are established for ever and ever, executed with truth and uprightness.
PSA 111:9 To his people he sent redemption, he has appointed his covenant forever. His name is holy and awe-inspiring.
PSA 111:10 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom those who keep it are wise indeed. His praise abides for ever and ever.
PSA 112:1 Hallelujah. Happy are those who fear the Lord, and greatly delight in his commandments.
PSA 112:2 Mighty on earth shall be their seed; a blessing shall rest on the race of the upright.
PSA 112:3 Wealth and riches are in their houses, their prosperity stands forever.
PSA 112:4 To the upright arises light in the darkness; full of favour and pity and kindness are they.
PSA 112:5 It is well with those who show pity and lend, who support all their affairs upon justice.
PSA 112:6 For they will never be shaken; the just will be forever remembered.
PSA 112:7 They will not be afraid of evil tidings, with steady heart they trust the Lord.
PSA 112:8 Their heart is firm and unafraid: they know they will feast their eyes on their enemies.
PSA 112:9 With lavish hands they give to the poor, and their prosperity stands forever. They are lifted to heights of triumph and honour.
PSA 112:10 The sight of them fills the wicked with anger: grinding their teeth with despair. The hopes of the wicked will come to nothing.
PSA 113:1 Hallelujah. Praise the Lord, you his servants, praise the name of the Lord.
PSA 113:2 The name of the Lord be blessed from now and for evermore.
PSA 113:3 From sunrise to sunset is the name of the Lord to be praised.
PSA 113:4 High is the Lord above all nations, above the heavens is his glory.
PSA 113:5 Who is like the Lord our God, seated on high?
PSA 113:6 He bends down to look at the heavens and earth.
PSA 113:7 He raises the weak from the dust, he lifts the poor from the dunghill,
PSA 113:8 and sets them beside the princes, even the princes of his people.
PSA 113:9 He gives the childless woman a home, and makes her the happy mother of children. Hallelujah.
PSA 114:1 When Israel went out of Egypt, Jacob’s house from a barbarous people,
PSA 114:2 God chose Judah for himself, Israel became his kingdom.
PSA 114:3 The sea saw it, and fled, Jordan river ran backwards.
PSA 114:4 Mountains skipped like rams, hills like the young of the flock.
PSA 114:5 Why, sea, do you flee? Jordan, why run backwards?
PSA 114:6 Mountains, why skip ram-like? Why, hills, like the young of the flock?
PSA 114:7 Earth, tremble before the Lord, at the presence of Jacob’s God,
PSA 114:8 who turns rocks into pools of water, and flint into fountains of water.
PSA 115:1 Not to us, Lord, not to us, but to your name give glory, for your kindness’ and faithfulness’ sake.
PSA 115:2 Why should the heathen say, ‘Where is now their God?’
PSA 115:3 Our God he is in heaven; whatever he wishes, he does.
PSA 115:4 Their idols are silver and gold, made by human hands.
PSA 115:5 They have mouths, but cannot speak; they have eyes, but cannot see.
PSA 115:6 They have ears, but cannot hear; they have noses, but cannot smell.
PSA 115:7 They have hands, but cannot feel; they have feet, but cannot walk: no sound comes from their throats.
PSA 115:8 Their makers become like them, so do all who trust in them.
PSA 115:9 O Israel, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.
PSA 115:10 House of Aaron, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.
PSA 115:11 You who fear the Lord, trust in the Lord he is their help and their shield.
PSA 115:12 The Lord, mindful of us, will bless us: he will bless the house of Israel, he will bless the house of Aaron.
PSA 115:13 He will bless those who fear the Lord, the small and the great together.
PSA 115:14 May the Lord add to your numbers to you and to your children.
PSA 115:15 Blessed be you of the Lord, creator of heaven and earth.
PSA 115:16 The heavens are the heavens of the Lord, but the earth has he given to people.
PSA 115:17 The dead cannot praise the Lord, nor those who go down into silence.
PSA 115:18 But we will bless the Lord from now and for evermore. Hallelujah.
PSA 116:1 I love the Lord, for he hears my voice, my pleas for mercy.
PSA 116:2 For he has inclined his ear to me: I will call upon him as long as I live.
PSA 116:3 About me were snares of death, the anguish of Sheol was upon me: distress and sorrow were mine.
PSA 116:4 Then I called on the name of the Lord: ‘I beseech you, O Lord, deliver me.’
PSA 116:5 Gracious and just is the Lord, compassionate is our God.
PSA 116:6 The Lord preserves the simple; when I was drooping, he saved me.
PSA 116:7 Be at peace, my heart, once more, for the Lord has been good to you.
PSA 116:8 You have rescued me from death, my eyes from tears, my feet from stumbling.
PSA 116:9 Before the Lord I will walk in the land of the living.
PSA 116:10 I held fast my faith, though I said, ‘Ah me! I am sore afflicted,’
PSA 116:11 though in my alarm I said, ‘Everyone is a liar.’
PSA 116:12 What shall I render the Lord for all his bounty to me?
PSA 116:13 I will lift up the cup of salvation, and call on the name of the Lord.
PSA 116:14 I will pay my vows to the Lord in the presence of all his people.
PSA 116:15 Grave in the eyes of the Lord is the death of his loyal and loved ones.
PSA 116:16 Ah, Lord! I am your servant, your servant, child of your handmaid. You have loosened my bonds.
PSA 116:17 I will offer to you a thank-offering, and call on the name of the Lord.
PSA 116:18 I will pay my vows to the Lord in the presence of all his people,
PSA 116:19 in the courts of the house of the Lord, in the midst of you, O Jerusalem. Hallelujah.
PSA 117:1 Praise the Lord, all you nations: laud him, all you peoples.
PSA 117:2 For his mighty love is over us: the Lord is faithful forever. Hallelujah.
PSA 118:1 Give thanks to the Lord for his goodness, his kindness endures forever.
PSA 118:2 Let the house of Israel now say: his kindness endures forever.
PSA 118:3 Let the house of Aaron now say: his kindness endures forever.
PSA 118:4 Let those who fear the Lord now say: his kindness endures forever.
PSA 118:5 Out of straits I called on the Lord, the Lord answered and gave me room.
PSA 118:6 The Lord is mine; I am fearless. What can mere people do to me?
PSA 118:7 The Lord is mine, as my help: I shall feast my eyes on my foes.
PSA 118:8 It is better to hide in the Lord than to trust in mortals.
PSA 118:9 It is better to hide in the Lord than to put any trust in princes.
PSA 118:10 Everywhere heathen swarmed round me; in the name of the Lord I cut them down.
PSA 118:11 They swarmed, swarmed around me; in the name of the Lord I cut them down,
PSA 118:12 they swarmed around me like bees, they blazed like a fire of thorns: in the name of the Lord I cut them down.
PSA 118:13 Sore they pushed me, to make me fall; but the Lord gave me his help.
PSA 118:14 The Lord is my strength and my song, and he is become my salvation.
PSA 118:15 Hark! In the tents of the righteous glad cries of victory are ringing. The hand of the Lord has wrought bravely,
PSA 118:16 the hand of the Lord is exalted, the hand of the Lord has wrought bravely.
PSA 118:17 I shall not die: nay, I shall live, to declare the works of the Lord.
PSA 118:18 Though the Lord has chastened me sore, he has not given me over to death. (The Procession arrives at the Temple)
PSA 118:19 ‘Open to me the gates of victory. I would enter therein and give thanks to the Lord.’ (The Welcome)
PSA 118:20 ‘This is the gate of the Lord: the righteous may enter therein;’
PSA 118:21 I thank you because you have heard me, and are become my salvation.
PSA 118:22 The stone which the builders despised is become the head-stone of the corner.
PSA 118:23 This has been wrought by the Lord; it is marvellous in our eyes.
PSA 118:24 This day is the Lord’s own creation: in it let us joy and be glad.
PSA 118:25 O Lord, save us, we pray, O Lord, prosper, we pray.
PSA 118:26 Blessed the one who enters in the name of the Lord. From the house of the Lord we bless you.
PSA 118:27 The Lord is God, he has given us light. Wreathe the dance with boughs, till they touch the horns of the altar.
PSA 118:28 You are my God, I will thank you; O my God, I will exalt you.
PSA 118:29 Give thanks to the Lord for his goodness: his kindness endures forever.
PSA 119:1 Happy they whose life is blameless, who walk by the law of the Lord.
PSA 119:2 Happy they who keep his charges, and seek him with all their hearts;
PSA 119:3 who have done no wrong, but walk in his ways.
PSA 119:4 You yourself have appointed your precepts to be kept with diligence.
PSA 119:5 O to be steadily guided in the keeping of your statutes!
PSA 119:6 Then unashamed shall I be, when I look towards all your commandments.
PSA 119:7 I will thank you with heart unfeigned, when I learn your righteous judgments.
PSA 119:8 I will observe your statutes: O forsake me not utterly.
PSA 119:9 How can a young person keep their life pure? By giving heed to your word.
PSA 119:10 With all my heart have I sought you, let me not stray from your commandments.
PSA 119:11 In my heart have I treasured your word, to keep from sinning against you.
PSA 119:12 Blessed are you, O Lord; teach me your statutes.
PSA 119:13 With my lips have I rehearsed all the judgments of your mouth.
PSA 119:14 I delight in the way of your charges, more than in riches of all sorts.
PSA 119:15 I will muse upon your precepts, and look to your paths.
PSA 119:16 In your statutes I delight, I will not forget your word.
PSA 119:17 Grant that your servant may live, and I will observe your word.
PSA 119:18 Open my eyes, that I see wondrous things out of your law.
PSA 119:19 But a guest am I on the earth: hide not your commandments from me.
PSA 119:20 My heart is crushed with longing for your ordinances, at all times.
PSA 119:21 You rebuke the proud, the accursed, who wander from your commandments.
PSA 119:22 Roll away from me scorn and contempt, for I have observed your charges.
PSA 119:23 Though princes sit plotting against me, your servant will muse on your statutes.
PSA 119:24 Your charges are my delight, they are my counsellors.
PSA 119:25 I lie grovelling in the dust; revive me, as you have promised.
PSA 119:26 I told of my ways, you made answer; teach me your statutes.
PSA 119:27 Grant me insight into your precepts, and I will muse on your wonders.
PSA 119:28 I am overcome with sorrow; raise me up, as you have promised.
PSA 119:29 Put the way of falsehood from me, and graciously grant me your law.
PSA 119:30 I have chosen the way of fidelity, your ordinances I long for.
PSA 119:31 I hold fast to your charges: O put me not, Lord, to shame.
PSA 119:32 I will run in the way of your commandments, for you give me room of heart.
PSA 119:33 Teach me, O Lord, the way of your statutes, and I will keep it to the end,
PSA 119:34 instruct me to keep your law, and I will observe it with all my heart.
PSA 119:35 Guide me in the path of your commandments, for therein do I delight.
PSA 119:36 Incline my heart to your charges, and not to greed of gain.
PSA 119:37 Turn away my eyes from vain sights, revive me by your word.
PSA 119:38 Confirm to your servant the promise which is given to those who fear you.
PSA 119:39 Remove the reproach which I dread, because your judgments are good.
PSA 119:40 Behold, I long for your precepts. Quicken me in your righteousness.
PSA 119:41 Visit me, Lord, with your love and salvation, as you have promised.
PSA 119:42 So shall I answer my slanderers, for my trust is in your word.
PSA 119:43 Snatch not from my mouth the word of truth, for in your judgments I hope.
PSA 119:44 I will keep your law continually, for ever and evermore.
PSA 119:45 So shall I walk in wide spaces, for I give my mind to your precepts.
PSA 119:46 I will speak of your charge before kings, and will not be ashamed thereof.
PSA 119:47 Your commandments are my delight, I love them exceedingly.
PSA 119:48 I will lift up my hands to your commandments, and muse upon your statutes.
PSA 119:49 Remember your word to your servant, on which you have made me to hope.
PSA 119:50 This is my comfort in trouble, that your word gives life to me.
PSA 119:51 The arrogant utterly scorn me, but I have not declined from your law.
PSA 119:52 When I think of your judgments of old, O Lord, I take to me comfort.
PSA 119:53 I am seized with glowing anger at the wicked who forsake your law.
PSA 119:54 Your statutes have been to me songs in the house of my pilgrimage.
PSA 119:55 I remember your name in the night, O Lord and observe your law.
PSA 119:56 My lot has been this, that I have kept your precepts.
PSA 119:57 My portion are you, O Lord: I have promised to keep your words.
PSA 119:58 I entreat you with all my heart; grant me your promised favour.
PSA 119:59 I have thought upon my ways, and turned my feet to your charges.
PSA 119:60 I hasted and tarried not to give heed to your commandments.
PSA 119:61 Though the godless have wound their cords round me, I have not forgotten your law.
PSA 119:62 At midnight I rise to praise you because of your righteous judgments.
PSA 119:63 With all those who fear you I company, aid with those who observe your precepts.
PSA 119:64 The earth, Lord, is full of your kindness; teach me your Statutes.
PSA 119:65 Well have you dealt with your servant, as you have promised, O Lord.
PSA 119:66 Teach me discretion and knowledge, for I have believed your commandments.
PSA 119:67 Till trouble came I was a wanderer, but now I observe your word.
PSA 119:68 You are good and do good; teach me your statutes.
PSA 119:69 The proud have forged lies against me, but I keep your precepts with all my heart.
PSA 119:70 Their heart is gross like fat, but I delight in your law.
PSA 119:71 It was good for me to be humbled, that I should learn your statutes.
PSA 119:72 The law of your mouth is better to me than thousands of pieces of silver and gold.
PSA 119:73 Your hands have made me and fashioned me; make me wise to learn your commandments.
PSA 119:74 Those who fear you shall see me with joy, for in your word have I hoped.
PSA 119:75 I know, O Lord, that your judgments are right, and in faithfulness you have afflicted me.
PSA 119:76 Let your love be a comfort to me, for so have you promised your servant.
PSA 119:77 Visit me with your quickening pity, for your law is my delight.
PSA 119:78 Put the proud to shame, who have wronged me falsely: I will muse on your precepts.
PSA 119:79 Let those turn to me who fear you, that they may learn your charges.
PSA 119:80 Let my heart be sound in your statutes, that I may not be put to shame.
PSA 119:81 My long for you to rescue me, I put my hope in your word.
PSA 119:82 My eyes pine away for your promise: saying, ‘When will you comfort me?’
PSA 119:83 Though shrivelled like wine-skin in smoke, your statutes I have not forgotten.
PSA 119:84 How few are the days of your servant! When will you judge those who harass me?
PSA 119:85 Proud people have dug for me pits people who do not conform to your law.
PSA 119:86 All your commandments are trusty. With falsehood they harass me: help me.
PSA 119:87 They had nearly made an end of me, yet I did not forget your precepts.
PSA 119:88 Spare me in your kindness, and I will observe the charge of your mouth.
PSA 119:89 Forever, O Lord, is your word fixed firmly in the heavens.
PSA 119:90 Your truth endures age after age; it is established on earth, and it stands.
PSA 119:91 By your appointment they stand this day, for all are your servants.
PSA 119:92 Had not your law been my joy, in my misery then had I perished.
PSA 119:93 I will never forget your precepts, for through them you have put life in me.
PSA 119:94 I am yours, O save me, for I give my mind to your precepts.
PSA 119:95 The wicked lay wait to destroy me, but I give heed to your charge.
PSA 119:96 I have seen a limit to all things: but your commandment is spacious exceedingly.
PSA 119:97 O how I love your law! All the day long I muse on it.
PSA 119:98 Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies: for it is mine forever.
PSA 119:99 I am prudent above all my teachers, for your charges are my meditation.
PSA 119:100 I have insight more than the aged, because I observe your precepts.
PSA 119:101 I refrain my foot from all wicked ways, that I may keep your word.
PSA 119:102 I turn not aside from your judgments, for you yourself are my teacher.
PSA 119:103 How sweet are your words to my taste, sweeter than honey to my mouth!
PSA 119:104 Insight I win through your precepts, therefore every false way I hate.
PSA 119:105 Your word is a lamp to my feet, and a light to my path.
PSA 119:106 I have sworn an oath, and will keep it, to observe your righteous judgments.
PSA 119:107 I am afflicted sorely: revive me, O Lord, as you said.
PSA 119:108 Accept, Lord, my willing praise, and teach me your judgments.
PSA 119:109 My life is in ceaseless peril; but I do not forget your law.
PSA 119:110 The wicked set traps for me, yet I do not stray from your precepts.
PSA 119:111 In your charges are my everlasting inheritance, they are the joy of my heart.
PSA 119:112 I am resolved to perform your statutes forever, to the utmost.
PSA 119:113 I hate people of divided heart, but your law do I love.
PSA 119:114 You are my shelter and shield: in your word do I hope.
PSA 119:115 Begone, you wicked people, I will keep the commands of my God.
PSA 119:116 Uphold me and spare me, as you have promised: O disappoint me not.
PSA 119:117 Hold me up, and I shall be saved: and your statutes shall be my unceasing delight.
PSA 119:118 All who swerve from your statutes you spurn: their cunning is in vain.
PSA 119:119 All the wicked of earth you count as dross, therefore I love your charges.
PSA 119:120 My flesh, for fear of you, shudders, and I stand in awe of your judgments.
PSA 119:121 Justice and right have I practised, do not leave me to my oppressors.
PSA 119:122 Be your servant’s surety for good, let not the proud oppress me.
PSA 119:123 My eyes pine for your salvation, and for your righteous promise.
PSA 119:124 Deal in your love with your servant, and teach me your statutes.
PSA 119:125 Your servant am I; instruct me, that I may know your charges.
PSA 119:126 It is time for the Lord to act: they have violated your law.
PSA 119:127 Therefore I love your commandments above gold, above fine gold.
PSA 119:128 So by all your precepts I guide me, and every false way I hate.
PSA 119:129 Your decrees are wonderful, gladly I keep them.
PSA 119:130 When your word is unfolded, light breaks; it imparts to the simple wisdom.
PSA 119:131 With open mouth I pant with longing for your commandments.
PSA 119:132 Turn to me with your favour, as is just to those who love you.
PSA 119:133 Steady my steps by your word, so that sin have no power over me.
PSA 119:134 Set me free from those who oppress me, and I shall observe your precepts.
PSA 119:135 Shine with your face on your servant, and teach me your statutes.
PSA 119:136 My eyes run down with rills of water, because your law is not kept.
PSA 119:137 Righteous are you, O Lord, and right are your ordinances.
PSA 119:138 The laws you has ordered are just, and trusty exceedingly.
PSA 119:139 My jealousy has undone me, that my foes have forgotten your words.
PSA 119:140 Your word has been tested well; and your servant loves it.
PSA 119:141 I am little and held in contempt, but your precepts I have not forgotten.
PSA 119:142 Just is your justice forever, and trusty is your law.
PSA 119:143 Stress and strain are upon me, but your commandments are my delight.
PSA 119:144 Right are your charges forever, instruct me that I may live.
PSA 119:145 With my whole heart I cry; O answer me. I would keep your statutes, O Lord.
PSA 119:146 I cry to you: O save me, and I will observe your charges.
PSA 119:147 Before dawn I cry for your help: in your word do I hope.
PSA 119:148 Awake I meet the night-watches, to muse upon your sayings.
PSA 119:149 Hear my voice in your kindness: O Lord, by your judgments revive me.
PSA 119:150 Near me are wicked tormentors, who are far from thoughts of your law;
PSA 119:151 but near, too, are you, O Lord, and all your commandments are trusty.
PSA 119:152 Long have I known from your charges that you have founded them for all time.
PSA 119:153 Look on my misery, and rescue me; for I do not forget your law.
PSA 119:154 Defend my cause and redeem me: revive me, as you have promised.
PSA 119:155 Salvation is far from the wicked, for their mind is not in your statutes.
PSA 119:156 Great is your pity, O Lord: Revive me, as you have ordained.
PSA 119:157 My foes and tormentors are many, but I have not declined from your charges.
PSA 119:158 I behold the traitors with loathing, for they do not observe your word.
PSA 119:159 Behold how I love your precepts: revive me, O Lord!, in your kindness.
PSA 119:160 The sum of your word is truth, all your laws are just and eternal.
PSA 119:161 Princes have harassed me wantonly: but my heart stands in awe of your word.
PSA 119:162 Over your word I rejoice as one who finds great spoil.
PSA 119:163 Falsehood I hate and abhor, but your law do I love.
PSA 119:164 Seven times a day do I praise you because of your righteous judgments.
PSA 119:165 Right well do they fare who love your law: they go on their way without stumbling.
PSA 119:166 I hope for your salvation; O Lord I do your commandments.
PSA 119:167 I observe your charges: I love them greatly.
PSA 119:168 I observe your precepts and charges: all my ways are before you.
PSA 119:169 Let my cry come before you, O Lord: give me insight, as you have promised.
PSA 119:170 Let my prayer enter into your presence: deliver me, as you have said.
PSA 119:171 My lips shall be fountains of praise, that you teach me your statutes.
PSA 119:172 My tongue shall sing of your word, for all your commandments are right.
PSA 119:173 Let your hand be ready to help me, for your precepts have been my choice.
PSA 119:174 I long, Lord, for your salvation, and your law is my delight.
PSA 119:175 Revive me that I may praise you, and let your precepts help me.
PSA 119:176 I have strayed like a wandering sheep seek your servant, because I do not forget your commandments.
PSA 120:1 A song of ascents. In distress I cried to the Lord, and he answered me.
PSA 120:2 ‘Deliver me, Lord, from the lip that is false and the tongue that is crafty.’
PSA 120:3 What shall he give to you, you tongue that is crafty? What yet shall he give to you?
PSA 120:4 Arrows of warrior, sharpened, with glowing broom coals together.
PSA 120:5 Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshech, that I live by the tents of Kedar.
PSA 120:6 Already too long have I dwelt among those who hate peace.
PSA 120:7 I am for peace: but when I speak of it, they are for war.
PSA 121:1 A song of ascents. I lift up my eyes to the mountains. From where will help for me come?
PSA 121:2 My help will come from the Lord the creator of heaven and earth.
PSA 121:3 Your foot he will not let stumble: he who guards you will not sleep.
PSA 121:4 He who watches over Israel will neither slumber nor sleep.
PSA 121:5 The Lord himself protects you, is your shelter beside you.
PSA 121:6 The sun by day will not strike you, nor the moon by night.
PSA 121:7 From all harm the Lord will guard you, will watch over your life.
PSA 121:8 The Lord will guard your going and coming from now and for evermore.
PSA 122:1 A song of ascents. Of David. I was glad when they said to me, ‘We will go to the house of the Lord.’
PSA 122:2 Now we are standing, within your gates, O Jerusalem.
PSA 122:3 O Jerusalem, built close-packed, like a city without breach or gap,
PSA 122:4 to you do the tribes come, the tribes of the Lord, as the law has ordained for Israel, there to give thanks to the Lord.
PSA 122:5 There once stood thrones of justice even thrones of the household of David.
PSA 122:6 Pray that all may be well with Jerusalem, and well with those who love you,
PSA 122:7 well within your ramparts, and well within your palaces.
PSA 122:8 For the sake of my brethren and friends, I will wish you now prosperity:
PSA 122:9 for the sake of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek your good.
PSA 123:1 A song of ascents. I Lift up my eyes to you, who are throned in the heavens.
PSA 123:2 As the eyes of a servant turn to the hand of his master, or the eyes of a maid to the hand of her mistress, so do our eyes turn to the Lord our God, until he is gracious to us.
PSA 123:3 Be gracious, be gracious to us, Lord. Scorn enough, and more, have we borne
PSA 123:4 More than enough have we borne of derision from those at their ease, of scorn from those who are haughty.
PSA 124:1 A song of ascents. Of David. ‘Had it not been the Lord who was for us’ let Israel say
PSA 124:2 ‘Had it not been the Lord who was for us when enemies rose against us,
PSA 124:3 then alive they’d have swallowed us up, when their anger was kindled against us.
PSA 124:4 Then the waters would’ve swept us away, and the torrent passed over us clean:
PSA 124:5 then most sure would’ve passed over us clean the wild seething waters.’
PSA 124:6 Blest be the Lord who has given us not to be torn by their teeth.
PSA 124:7 We are like a bird just escaped from the snare of the fowler. The snare is broken, and we are escaped.
PSA 124:8 Our help is the name of the Lord, the Creator of heaven and earth.
PSA 125:1 A song of ascents. Those who trust in the Lord are like Mount Zion, that cannot be moved, but abides forever.
PSA 125:2 Round Jerusalem are the mountains, and the Lord is round his people from now and for evermore.
PSA 125:3 For he will not suffer the sceptre of wrong to rest on the land allotted to the righteous; else the righteous might put forth their own hand to evil.
PSA 125:4 Do good, O Lord, to the good, and to the true-hearted.
PSA 125:5 But those who swerve into crooked ways will the Lord lead away with the workers of evil. Peace be upon Israel.
PSA 126:1 A song of ascents. When the Lord turned the fortunes of Zion, we were like dreamers.
PSA 126:2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter, our tongue with glad shouts; then among the nations they said, ‘The Lord has dealt greatly with them.’
PSA 126:3 The Lord had dealt greatly with us, and we were rejoicing.
PSA 126:4 Turn our fortunes, O Lord, as the streams in the Negreb.
PSA 126:5 They who sow in tears shall reap with glad shouts.
PSA 126:6 Forth they fare, with their burden of seed, and they weep as they go. But home, home, with glad shouts they shall come with their arms full of sheaves.
PSA 127:1 A song of ascents. Of Solomon. Unless the Lord builds the house, those who build it labour in vain. Unless the Lord guards the city, the watchman wakes in vain.
PSA 127:2 In vain you rise early, and finish so late, and so eat sorrow’s bread; for he cares for his loved ones in their sleep.
PSA 127:3 Children are a gift of the Lord, the fruit of the womb, a reward.
PSA 127:4 Like arrows wielded by warriors, are the children of youth.
PSA 127:5 Happy the man who has filled his quiver full of them. He will not be ashamed when he speaks with enemies in the gate.
PSA 128:1 A song of ascents. Happy all who fear the Lord, who walk in his ways.
PSA 128:2 You will eat what your hands have toiled for, and be happy and prosperous!
PSA 128:3 Like a fruitful vine shall your wife be in the innermost room of your house: your children, like olive shoots, round about your table.
PSA 128:4 See! This is the blessing of the man who fears the Lord.
PSA 128:5 The Lord shall bless you from Zion. You will see Jerusalem nourish all the days of your life.
PSA 128:6 You will see your children’s children. Peace upon Israel.
PSA 129:1 A song of ascents. ‘Sore have they vexed me from youth’ thus let Israel say
PSA 129:2 ‘Sore have they vexed me from youth, but they have not prevailed against me.
PSA 129:3 ‘The ploughers ploughed on my back, they made their furrows long.
PSA 129:4 But the Lord, who is righteous, has cut the cords of the wicked.’
PSA 129:5 Let all who are haters of Zion be put to shame and defeated.
PSA 129:6 May they be as the grass on the house-top, which withers before it shoots up;
PSA 129:7 which fills not the arms of the reaper, nor the lap of the binder of sheaves
PSA 129:8 whereof no one says as they pass, ‘The blessing of God be upon you.’ In the name of the Lord we bless you.
PSA 130:1 A song of ascents. Out of the depths I call to you, Lord.
PSA 130:2 Lord, hear my voice: give heed with your ears to my loud plea.
PSA 130:3 If you should mark sin, Lord, O Lord, who could stand?
PSA 130:4 But with you is forgiveness, that you may be feared.
PSA 130:5 I wait for the Lord, I wait for his word,
PSA 130:6 I look for the Lord more than watchman for morning, than watchman for morning.
PSA 130:7 Israel, hope in the Lord: with the Lord there is love with him plenteous redemption.
PSA 130:8 And he redeems Israel from all his iniquities.
PSA 131:1 A song of ascents. Of David. O Lord, my heart is not haughty, my eyes are not lofty, I walk not among great things, things too wonderful for me.
PSA 131:2 Yes, I have soothed and stilled myself, like a young child on his mother’s lap; like a young child am I.
PSA 131:3 O Israel, hope in the Lord from now and for evermore.
PSA 132:1 A song of ascents. Remember, O Lord, David all his sufferings,
PSA 132:2 the oath that he swore to the Lord, and his vow to the Strong One of Jacob,
PSA 132:3 never to enter his tent, never to lie on his bed,
PSA 132:4 never to give his eyes sleep or his eyelids slumber,
PSA 132:5 till he had found a place for the Lord, for the Strong One of Jacob to live in.
PSA 132:6 We heard of it in Ephrathah, in the fields of Jaar we found it.
PSA 132:7 We went to the place where he dwelt, we bowed ourselves low at his footstool.
PSA 132:8 ‘Arise, Lord, and enter your resting-place, you and your mighty ark.
PSA 132:9 Let your priests wear a garment of righteousness, your faithful shout aloud for joy.
PSA 132:10 For the sake of David your servant, do not reject your Anointed.’
PSA 132:11 The Lord swore an oath to David an oath that he will not break; ‘I will set on your throne a prince of your line.
PSA 132:12 If your sons keep my covenant and the statutes I teach them, then their sons, too, forever, will sit on your throne.’
PSA 132:13 For the choice of the Lord is Zion; she is the home of his heart.
PSA 132:14 ‘This is forever my resting-place, this is the home of my heart.
PSA 132:15 I will royally bless her provision, and give bread to her poor in abundance.
PSA 132:16 Her priests I will clothe with salvation; her faithful will shout for joy.
PSA 132:17 There will I raise up for David a dynasty of power. I have set my anointed a lamp that shall never go out.
PSA 132:18 Robes of shame I will put on his foes, but on his head a glittering crown.’
PSA 133:1 A song of ascents. Of David. Behold! How good and how pleasant is the dwelling of kindred together!
PSA 133:2 Like precious oil on the head that ran down on the beard, the beard of Aaron, running over the collar of his robe:
PSA 133:3 like the dew upon Hermon which falls on the mountains of Zion. For there has the Lord ordained blessing – life that is endless.
PSA 134:1 A song of ascents. Come, praise the Lord, all you the Lord’s servants, who stand by night in the house of the Lord.
PSA 134:2 Lift your hands to the holy place, praise the Lord.
PSA 134:3 The Lord who made heaven and earth, bless you from Zion.
PSA 135:1 Hallelujah. Praise the name of the Lord. Praise the Lord, you his servants,
PSA 135:2 who stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of our God.
PSA 135:3 Praise the Lord, for the Lord is good: Sing praise to his name it is pleasant.
PSA 135:4 The Lord for himself chose Jacob, Israel as his own special treasure.
PSA 135:5 For I know that the Lord is great, that our Lord is above all gods.
PSA 135:6 All that he wills he does in the heavens and on the earth, in the seas and in all the abysses.
PSA 135:7 Clouds he brings up from the ends of the earth, lightnings he makes for the rain, wind he brings out of his storehouses.
PSA 135:8 The firstborn of Egypt he struck, both humans and animals.
PSA 135:9 Signs and wonders he sent into your midst, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh and all his servants.
PSA 135:10 Many nations he struck, mighty kings he slew
PSA 135:11 Sihon, king of the Amorites, Og, king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan.
PSA 135:12 He gave their land for possession, possession to Israel his people.
PSA 135:13 Your name, O Lord, is forever; your memorial world without end.
PSA 135:14 For the Lord secures right for his people, and takes pity upon his servants.
PSA 135:15 The idols of heathen are silver made by human hands.
PSA 135:16 They have mouths, but cannot speak: they have eyes, but cannot see.
PSA 135:17 They have ears, but cannot hear: there is no breath in their mouths.
PSA 135:18 Their makers become like them, so do all who trust in them.
PSA 135:19 House of Israel, praise the Lord: house of Araon, praise the Lord.
PSA 135:20 House of Levi, praise the Lord: you who fear the Lord, praise the Lord.
PSA 135:21 Blest be the Lord out of Zion, who lives in Jerusalem. Hallelujah.
PSA 136:1 Give thanks to the Lord for his goodness: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:2 Give thanks to the God of gods: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:3 Give thanks to the Lord of lords: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:4 To him who alone does great wonders: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:5 Whose wisdom created the heavens: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:6 Who spread forth the earth on the waters: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:7 Who made great lights: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:8 The sun to rule over the day: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:9 Moon and stars to rule over the night: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:10 Who struck the firstborn of Egypt: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:11 And brought Israel out from their midst: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:12 With strong hand and outstretched arm: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:13 Who cut the Red Sea in pieces: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:14 And brought Israel right through the midst: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:15 And shook Pharaoh with all his host into the sea for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:16 Who led his people through the desert: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:17 Who struck down great kings: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:18 And slew noble kings: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:19 Sihon, king of the Amorites: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:20 And Og, king of Bashan: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:21 Who gave their land for possession: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:22 Possession to Israel his servant: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:23 Who remembered our low estate: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:24 And rescued us from our foes: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:25 Who gives to all flesh food: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 136:26 Give thanks to the God of heaven: for his kindness endures forever.
PSA 137:1 By the waters of Babylon there we sat, and we wept at the thought of Zion.
PSA 137:2 There on the poplars we hung our harps.
PSA 137:3 For there our captors called for a song: our tormentors, rejoicing, saying: ‘Sing us one of the songs of Zion.’
PSA 137:4 How can we sing the Lord’s song in the foreigner’s land?
PSA 137:5 If I forget you, Jerusalem, may my right hand wither.
PSA 137:6 May my tongue stick to the roof of my mouth, if I am unmindful of you, or don’t set Jerusalem above my chief joy.
PSA 137:7 Remember the Edomites, Lord, the day of Jerusalem’s fall, when they said, ‘Lay her bare, lay her bare, right down to her very foundation.’
PSA 137:8 Babylon, despoiler, happy are those who pay you back for all you have done to us.
PSA 137:9 Happy are they who seize and dash your children against the rocks.
PSA 138:1 Of David. I will thank you, O Lord, with all my heart: in the sight of the gods I will sing your praise,
PSA 138:2 and prostrate before your holy temple, will praise your name for your constant love, for you have exulted your promise above all.
PSA 138:3 When I called you, you answered; you gave me strength, you inspired me.
PSA 138:4 All the kings of the earth shall praise you, O Lord, when they shall have heard the words you have uttered;
PSA 138:5 and they shall sing of the ways of the Lord, and tell of the Lord’s transcendent glory.
PSA 138:6 For, high though the Lord is, he looks on the lowly, and strikes down the haughty from far away.
PSA 138:7 Though my way be distressful, yet you preserve me: you lay your hand on my angry foes, and your right hand gives me victory.
PSA 138:8 The Lord will accomplish all that which concerns me. Your kindness, O Lord, endures forever. O do not abandon the work of your hands.
PSA 139:1 For the leader. Of David, a psalm. O Lord, you search and know me;
PSA 139:2 when I sit, when I rise you know it, you perceive my thoughts from afar.
PSA 139:3 When I walk, when I lie you sift it, familiar with all my ways.
PSA 139:4 There is not a word on my tongue, but see! Lord, you know it all.
PSA 139:5 Behind and before you beset me, upon me you lay your hand.
PSA 139:6 It’s too wonderful for me to know too lofty I cannot attain it.
PSA 139:7 Whither shall I go from your spirit? Or whither shall I flee from your face?
PSA 139:8 If I climb up to heaven, you are there: or make Sheol my bed, you are there.
PSA 139:9 If I lift up the wings of the morning and fly to the end of the sea,
PSA 139:10 there also your hand would grasp me, and your right hand take hold of me.
PSA 139:11 If I say, ‘Let the darkness cover me, and night be the light about me,’
PSA 139:12 The dark is not dark for you, but night is as light as the day.
PSA 139:13 For you did put me together; in my mother’s womb you did weave me.
PSA 139:14 I give you praise for my fashioning so full of awe, so wonderful. Your works are wonderful. You knew me right well;
PSA 139:15 my bones were not hidden from you, when I was made in secret, and woven in the depths of the earth.
PSA 139:16 Your eyes saw all my days: they stood on your book every one written down, before they were fashioned, while none of them yet was mine.
PSA 139:17 But how far, O God, beyond measure are your thoughts! How mighty their sum!
PSA 139:18 Should I count, they are more than the sand. When I wake, I am still with you.
PSA 139:19 Will you slay the wicked, O God? And remove from me the bloodthirsty,
PSA 139:20 who maliciously defy you and take your name in vain.
PSA 139:21 Do I not hate those who hate you, Lord? Do I not loathe those who resist you?
PSA 139:22 With perfect hatred I hate them, I count them my enemies.
PSA 139:23 Search me, O God, know my heart: test me, and know my thoughts,
PSA 139:24 and see if guile be in me; and lead me in the way everlasting.
PSA 140:1 To the leader. A Psalm of David. Rescue me, Lord, from evil people; from the violent guard me
PSA 140:2 from those who plot evil in their heart, and stir up war continually:
PSA 140:3 who make their tongue as sharp as a serpent’s, and under whose lips is the poison of adders. Selah
PSA 140:4 Preserve me, O Lord, from the hands of the wicked, from the violent guard me from those who are plotting to trip up my feet.
PSA 140:5 The proud have hidden a trap for me, cords they have spread as a net for my feet: snares they have set at the side of my track. Selah
PSA 140:6 I have said to the Lord, ‘My God are you; attend, Lord, to my loud plea.
PSA 140:7 O Lord my Lord, my saviour mighty, you did cover my head in the day of battle.
PSA 140:8 Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked; and what they have purposed, promote you not.’ Selah
PSA 140:9 Let them not lift up their heads against me. May the mischief they prate bring themselves to destruction,
PSA 140:10 may he rain upon them coals of fire, may he strike them down swiftly, to rise no more,
PSA 140:11 no place in the land may there be for the slanderer: may the violent be hunted from sorrow to sorrow.
PSA 140:12 I know that the Lord will do right by the weak, and will execute justice for those who are needy.
PSA 140:13 Surely the righteous shall praise your name, and they who are upright shall live in your presence.
PSA 141:1 A psalm of David. Lord, I call to you: hasten, to me, attend to my voice, when I call to you.
PSA 141:2 Let my prayer be presented as incense before you, and my uplifted hands as the evening meal-offering.
PSA 141:3 Set, O Lord, a watch on my mouth, put a guard on the door of my lips.
PSA 141:4 Incline not my heart to an evil matter, to busy myself in deeds of wickedness, in company with workers of evil: never may I partake of their dainties.
PSA 141:5 A wound or reproof from a good person in kindness is oil which my head shall never refuse. In their misfortune my prayer is still with them.
PSA 141:6 Abandoned they are to the hands of their judges: they shall learn that my words are true.
PSA 141:7 Like stones on a country road cleft and broken so lie our bones scattered for Death to devour.
PSA 141:8 But my eyes are turned towards you, O Lord. Do not pour out my life, for in you I take refuge.
PSA 141:9 Keep me safe from the trap they have laid for me, from the snares of the workers of trouble.
PSA 141:10 Into their own nets let wicked people fall; while I pass by in safety.
PSA 142:1 A maskil of David, while he was in the cave, a prayer. Loudly I cry to the Lord: to the Lord plead loudly for mercy,
PSA 142:2 I pour my complaint before him, I tell my troubles to him.
PSA 142:3 When my spirit is faint within me, my path is known to you. In the way I am wont to walk in, they have hidden a trap for me.
PSA 142:4 I look to the right and the left; but not a friend have I. No place of refuge is left me, not a man to care for me.
PSA 142:5 So I cry to you, O Lord: I say, ‘My refuge are you, all I have in the land of the living.’
PSA 142:6 Attend to my piercing cry, for very weak am I. Save me from those who pursue me, for they are too strong for me.
PSA 142:7 Free me from prison, that I may give thanks to your name, for the righteous are patiently waiting till you show your bounty to me.
PSA 143:1 A psalm of David. Listen, O Lord, to my prayer; attend to my plea. In your faithfulness give me answer, and in your righteousness.
PSA 143:2 With your servant O enter you not into judgment, for in your sight can no one alive be justified.
PSA 143:3 For the enemy persecutes me, crushing my life to the ground, making me live in the darkness, as those who have long been dead.
PSA 143:4 My spirit is faint within me, my heart is bewildered within me.
PSA 143:5 I remember the days of old, and brood over all you have done, musing on all that your hands have wrought.
PSA 143:6 I spread out my hands to you: I thirst for you, like parched earth. Selah
PSA 143:7 Answer me soon, Lord, because my spirit is spent. Hide not your face from me, else become I like those who go down to the pit.
PSA 143:8 Let me learn of your love in the morning, for my trust is in you. Teach me the way I should go: for my heart longs for you.
PSA 143:9 Save me, O Lord, from my foes: for to you I have fled for refuge.
PSA 143:10 Teach me to do your will, for you yourself are my God. Guide me by your good spirit, O Lord, on a way that is smooth.
PSA 143:11 Be true to your name Lord, spare me, bring me out of distress in your faithfulness.
PSA 143:12 In your kindness extinguish my enemies, and all those who vex me destroy; for I am your servant.
PSA 144:1 Of David. Blest be the Lord my rock, who trains my hands for war, my fingers for fighting.
PSA 144:2 My rock and my fortress, my tower, my deliverer, my shield, behind whom I take refuge, who lays nations low at my feet.
PSA 144:3 Lord, what are mortals that you care for them, humans, that you think of them?
PSA 144:4 They are like a breath, their days as a shadow that passes.
PSA 144:5 Lord, bow your heavens and come down: touch the hills, so that they smoke.
PSA 144:6 Flash forth lightning and scatter them, your arrows send forth and confound them.
PSA 144:7 Stretch out your hand from on high; pluck me out of the mighty waters, out of the hands of foreigners,
PSA 144:8 who speak with the mouth of falsehood, and lift their right hand to swear lies.
PSA 144:9 O God, a new song I would sing you, on a ten-stringed harp make you music.
PSA 144:10 For to kings you give the victory, and David your servant you save.
PSA 144:11 Snatch me from the cruel sword, rescue me from the hand of foreigners, who speak with the mouth of falsehood, and lift their right hand to swear lies.
PSA 144:12 May our sons in their youth be as plants well tended: our daughters like cornices carved as in palaces.
PSA 144:13 May our barns be bursting with produce of all kinds. In the fields may our sheep bear by thousands and ten thousands.
PSA 144:14 May our cattle be fat, our walls unbreached, may no cry of distress ring in our streets.
PSA 144:15 Happy the people who fares so well: and so fares the people whose God is the Lord.
PSA 145:1 A song of praise. Of David. I will exalt you, my God, O king: I will praise your name for ever and ever.
PSA 145:2 I will bless you every day: I will praise your name for ever and ever.
PSA 145:3 Great is the Lord and worthy all praise, his greatness is unsearchable.
PSA 145:4 One age to another shall praise your deeds, declaring the mighty things you have done.
PSA 145:5 Of your glorious majesty they shall tell, and I will muse of your many wonders.
PSA 145:6 Of the might of your terrible acts they shall speak, and the tale of your great deeds I will tell.
PSA 145:7 The fame of your abundant goodness and righteousness they shall pour forth in song.
PSA 145:8 The Lord is full of grace and pity, patient and rich in loving-kindness.
PSA 145:9 The Lord is good to all the world, and his pity is over all things that he made.
PSA 145:10 All your works give you thanks, O Lord, and you are blessed of those who love you.
PSA 145:11 They shall speak of your glorious kingdom, and of your might shall they discourse,
PSA 145:12 making known to all his mighty acts, and the glorious majesty of his kingdom.
PSA 145:13 Yours is a kingdom that lives through all ages: through all generations extends your dominion.
PSA 145:14 The Lord upholds all who fall; he lifts up all who are bowed down.
PSA 145:15 The eyes of all look in hope to you, and you give them their food in due season.
PSA 145:16 You yourself open your hand, and fill with your favour all things that live.
PSA 145:17 The Lord is righteous in all his ways, gracious is he in all that he does.
PSA 145:18 The Lord is near to all who call him, to all who call upon him in truth.
PSA 145:19 He will fulfil the desires of those who fear him; he will hear their cry for help and save them.
PSA 145:20 The Lord is the keeper of all who love him, but all the wicked will he destroy.
PSA 145:21 My mouth will utter the praise of the Lord, and all life will bless his holy name for ever and ever.
PSA 146:1 My soul, praise the Lord.
PSA 146:2 I will praise the Lord, while I live; I will sing to my God, while I am.
PSA 146:3 Put not your trust in princes mortals, in whom is no help.
PSA 146:4 When their breath goes out, they go back to the dust: on that very day their purposes perish.
PSA 146:5 Happy those whose help is the God of Jacob: whose hope is set on the Lord their God,
PSA 146:6 the Creator of heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in them. He remains eternally loyal.
PSA 146:7 For the wronged he executes justice; he gives bread to the hungry; the Lord releases the prisoners.
PSA 146:8 The Lord gives sight to the blind: the Lord raises those who are bowed. The Lord loves the righteous.
PSA 146:9 The Lord preserves the stranger, upholds the widow and orphan, but the wicked he leads to disaster.
PSA 146:10 The Lord shall reign forever, your God, O Zion, to all generations. Hallelujah.
PSA 147:1 Hallelujah. It is good to sing praise to our God, for praise is sweet and seemly.
PSA 147:2 The Lord builds up Jerusalem, the outcasts of Israel he gathers.
PSA 147:3 He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds.
PSA 147:4 He counts the numberless stars, he gives names to them all.
PSA 147:5 Great is our Lord, rich in power, and measureless is his wisdom.
PSA 147:6 The Lord lifts up the down-trodden, the wicked he brings to the ground.
PSA 147:7 Sing songs of thanks to the Lord, and play on the lyre to our God.
PSA 147:8 For he covers the sky with clouds, he prepares rain for the earth, makes grass to grow on the mountains.
PSA 147:9 He gives the cattle their food the young ravens when they cry.
PSA 147:10 His pleasure is not in the strength of the horse, his joy is not in the speed of a runner;
PSA 147:11 but the Lord has his pleasure in those who fear him, in those who wait for his kindness.
PSA 147:12 Praise the Lord, then, O Jerusalem: sing praise to your God, O Zion.
PSA 147:13 For he strengthens the bars of your gates, and blesses your children within you.
PSA 147:14 He brings peace to your borders, and choicest of wheat in abundance.
PSA 147:15 He sends his command to the earth: his word runs very swiftly.
PSA 147:16 Snow he gives like wool, frost he scatters like ashes.
PSA 147:17 He casts forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold?
PSA 147:18 He sends forth his word, and melts them: his wind blows the waters flow.
PSA 147:19 He declares his word to Jacob, his statutes and judgments to Israel.
PSA 147:20 No other nation did he do this for, they know nothing of his judgments. Hallelujah.
PSA 148:1 Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise him in the heights.
PSA 148:2 Praise him, all his angels; praise him, all his hosts.
PSA 148:3 Praise him, sun and moon; praise him, all stars of light.
PSA 148:4 Praise him, you highest heavens, and you waters above the heavens.
PSA 148:5 Let them praise the name of the Lord, for at his command they were made.
PSA 148:6 And he fixed them for ever and ever by a law which they dare not transgress.
PSA 148:7 Praise the Lord from the earth: you depths, with your monsters, all.
PSA 148:8 Fire, hail, snow and ice, and stormy wind doing his word.
PSA 148:9 All you mountains and hills, all you fruit trees and cedars,
PSA 148:10 all you wild beasts and tame, creeping things, birds on the wing.
PSA 148:11 All you kings and nations of earth; all you princes and judges of earth:
PSA 148:12 young men and maidens together, old men and children together.
PSA 148:13 Let them praise the name of the Lord, for his name alone is exalted. Over heaven and earth is his glory.
PSA 148:14 He has lifted his people to honour. Wherefore this chorus of praise from his saints, from Israel, the people who stand in his fellowship. Hallelujah.
PSA 149:1 Hallelujah. Sing to the Lord a new song, sound his praise where the faithful are gathered.
PSA 149:2 Let Israel rejoice in its maker, sons of Zion exult in their king.
PSA 149:3 Let them praise his name in the dance, making music with lyre and with timbrel.
PSA 149:4 For the Lord delights in his people, adorning the humble with victory.
PSA 149:5 Let the faithful exult and extol him with glad ringing cries all night long.
PSA 149:6 High praises of God in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand:
PSA 149:7 on the heathen to execute vengeance, and chastisement sore on the nations,
PSA 149:8 binding their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron,
PSA 149:9 to execute on them the doom that is written. This is the glory of all his faithful. Hallelujah.
PSA 150:1 Hallelujah. Praise God in his holy place. Praise him in the sky, his stronghold.
PSA 150:2 Praise him for his deeds of power. Praise him for his boundless greatness.
PSA 150:3 Praise him with blast of horn; praise him with harp and lyre.
PSA 150:4 Praise him with timbrel and dance; praise him with strings and pipe.
PSA 150:5 Praise him with resounding cymbals, praise him with clashing cymbals.
PSA 150:6 Let all that has breath praise the Lord. Hallelujah.
HOS 1:1 The Lord’s message to Hosea son of Beeri during the reigns of Kings Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah of Judah and during the reign of King Jeroboam, son of Joash of Israel.
HOS 1:2 When the Lord began to speak through Hosea, he said to him: ‘Go marry an unfaithful woman who will bear you children by her adultery, for like an adulterous wife the land is unfaithful to the Lord.’
HOS 1:3 So he married Gomer, the daughter of Dibliam, and when she conceived and bore him a son,
HOS 1:4 the Lord said: ‘Call him “Jezreel,” for in a little while I will punish the dynasty of Jehu for the blood shed at the valley of Jezreel, I will cause the kingdom of Israel to cease.
HOS 1:5 On that day, I will break Israel’s bows and arrows in the valley of Jezreel.’
HOS 1:6 When she conceived again and bore a daughter, the Lord said to Hosea: ‘Call her Lo-Ruhamah – “No-Compassion” for I will no longer have compassion on Israel, certainly not spare them.
HOS 1:7 But on Judah I will have compassion, I will deliver them by the Lord their God, but I will not deliver them by bow nor by sword, nor by battle nor by horses nor by horsemen.’
HOS 1:8 After she had weaned No-Compassion, and when she conceived and bore a son, he said:
HOS 1:9 ‘Call him Lo-Ammi – “Not-My-People” for you, Israel, are not my people, and I indeed am not your God.’
HOS 1:10 Yet the number of the Israelites will be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured or counted, and where they were told, ‘You are not my people,’ they will be called, ‘children of the living God.’
HOS 1:11 The Judeans and the Israelites will join together again, will appoint for themselves one leader, will return to their own land. Great will be the day of Jezreel!
HOS 2:1 So call your brothers, My People, and your sisters, Compassion.
HOS 2:2 Accuse, accuse your mother: for she is not my wife, and I will not be her husband. Let her put her acts of infidelity out of her sight, and her lovers from between her breasts,
HOS 2:3 else I will strip her bare, expose her as she was on the day of her birth, make her like the wilderness, let her become like a parched land, and let her die of thirst.
HOS 2:4 And on her children I will have no pity, since they are children of adultery,
HOS 2:5 for their mother has become a prostitute, she who conceived them has behaved shamefully. She has said, ‘I will go after my lovers who gave me my bread and my water, my wool, my flax, my oil, and my drink.’
HOS 2:6 That is why I am going to hedge up her ways with thorns, and build a wall about her, so that she cannot find her paths.
HOS 2:7 She will pursue her lovers, but will not overtake them. She will seek them, but not find them. In time she will say, ‘I will go back to my first husband, I was better off then than now.’
HOS 2:8 She herself did not know that it was I who gave her the grain, the sweet wine, and the oil, who lavished on her silver and gold – that they used in worshipping Baal!
HOS 2:9 So I will take back my grain at the harvest, and my sweet wine in its season. I will withdraw my wool and my flax, given to cover her nakedness;
HOS 2:10 and so I will strip her naked before her lovers, and no one can deliver her out of my hand.
HOS 2:11 I will end all her celebrations, her yearly feasts, her new moons, and her sabbaths, all her festivals.
HOS 2:12 I will lay waste her vines and her fig trees, of which she says, ‘These are my wages which my lovers have given me.’ I will make them a thicket, and the wild animals will eat them.
HOS 2:13 In this way I will punish her for the days of the Baals, in which she made offerings to them, and decked herself with earrings and jewels, and went after her lovers, but forgot me, – declares the Lord.
HOS 2:14 So I am going to court her, bring her into the wilderness, and speak tenderly to her.
HOS 2:15 I will give her from there her vineyards, and the valley of Achor as a door of hope. There she will respond as in the days of her youth, as in the days when she came up from the land of Egypt.
HOS 2:16 At that time, declares the Lord, you will call me your husband, and will no more call me your master.
HOS 2:17 I will remove the name of the Baals from her mouth, their names never again uttered.
HOS 2:18 On that day I will make for them a covenant with the wild animals, the birds of the sky, and the creatures that crawl on the earth. I will break the bow and the sword, banish battle from the land, and I will make them lie down in safety.
HOS 2:19 I will take you for my wife forever, I will take you for my wife in righteousness, in justice, in kindness, and in mercy.
HOS 2:20 I will take you for my wife in faithfulness, and you will know the Lord.
HOS 2:21 On that day I will answer – declares the Lord, I will answer the empty skies, and they will answer the dry earth.
HOS 2:22 The earth will answer with grain, and new wine and oil, and they will answer Jezreel,
HOS 2:23 and I will plant her in the land. I will have compassion to No-Compassion, I will say to Not-My-People, ‘You are my people,’ and they will say, ‘You are my God.’
HOS 3:1 Then the Lord said to me, ‘Go again, show love to this woman, who is loved by another, who commits adultery. Love her as the Lord loves the Israelites, though they turn to other gods, and love the raisin cakes offered to idols.
HOS 3:2 So I redeemed her for fifteen pieces of silver and a homer and a lethek of barley.
HOS 3:3 And I told her, ‘You must live with me for many days and you must not sleep around or marry another. And I will do the same for you.
HOS 3:4 And like this the Israelites will live for a long time without king and without prince, without sacrifice and without pillar, without ephod and without teraphim.
HOS 3:5 Yet afterward the Israelites will return, and seek the Lord their God and their Davidic king, and in the days to come they will turn with awe to the Lord and his goodness.
HOS 4:1 Hear the Lord’s message, Israelites, for the Lord has brought charges against the inhabitants of the land, for there is no fidelity, nor true love, nor knowledge of God in the land,
HOS 4:2 but cursing, lying, and murder, stealing, committing adultery, and deeds of violence, and acts of bloodshed quickly follow each other.
HOS 4:3 Therefore the land mourns, all its inhabitants languish, the wild animals and the birds of the skies, even the fish of the sea are dying.
HOS 4:4 Yet let no one bring charges, let none accuse, for your people are like those, who bring charges against a priest.
HOS 4:5 You stumble by day, and the prophet stumbles with you by night, and I will destroy your mother.
HOS 4:6 My people are being destroyed for lack of knowledge; because you have rejected knowledge I reject you from being priest to me. Since you have forgotten the teaching of your God, I also will forget your children.
HOS 4:7 The more priests there are, the more they sin against me. I will change their dignity to dishonour.
HOS 4:8 They feed on the sin offerings of my people, so they hunger after their guilt.
HOS 4:9 Thus it comes to be, like people, like priest: I will visit upon each punishment for their ways, and their deeds I will repay them.
HOS 4:10 They will eat and not be satisfied, they will sleep around but stay childless, because they have abandoned the Lord to give themselves to
HOS 4:11 prostitution. Old and new wine take away the understanding.
HOS 4:12 My own people ask counsel of a piece of wood! A stick gives them advice! For a spirit of prostitution has led them astray, they commit adultery against their God.
HOS 4:13 On the heights of the mountains they sacrifice, and on the hills they burn incense under oaks and poplars and terebinths, for their shade is so pleasant. Therefore your daughters become cult prostitutes, and your daughters-in-law commit adultery.
HOS 4:14 I will not punish your daughters for committing prostitution, nor your daughters-in-law for adultery. Your men visit prostitutes, sacrifice with cult prostitutes. So a people without understanding come to ruin!
HOS 4:15 Though you commit adultery, Israel, let not Judah become guilty. Do not go to Gilgal, do not go up to Beth-aven, nor swear an oath, ‘As the Lord lives.’
HOS 4:16 Like a wilful heifer, Israel is stubborn. Can the Lord now feed them as he would a lamb in a broad pasture?
HOS 4:17 Ephraim is wedded to idols. Leave them alone!
HOS 4:18 When their drinking is over they sleep with the cult prostitutes, their rulers love shameful ways.
HOS 4:19 A windstorm will wrap them in its wings and they will be ashamed of their sacrifices.
HOS 5:1 Hear this, priests! Attend, Israelites! Listen, royal family! For you is the judgment: a snare you have become at Mizpeh, and a net spread out on Tabor,
HOS 5:2 the rebels are deep in slaughter, but I will discipline all.
HOS 5:3 I know Ephraim, Israel is not hidden from me, for you, Ephraim, have committed prostitution and Israel is defiled.
HOS 5:4 Their deeds do not permit them to return to their God. For the spirit of prostitution is within them, they do not know the Lord.
HOS 5:5 Israel’s arrogance testifies against them, Israel, even Ephraim, stumble in their sin, and Judah also stumbles with them.
HOS 5:6 With their sheep and their cattle they will go to seek the Lord but they will not find him, he has withdrawn from them,
HOS 5:7 for they have been untrue to the Lord, their children are strangers. Their new moon festivals will soon destroy them and their fields.
HOS 5:8 Blow the trumpet in Gibeah, the clarion in Ramah! Raise the alarm in Beth-aven: we are with you, Benjamin!
HOS 5:9 Ephraim will become a desolation in the day of punishment, concerning the tribes of Israel I make known what is certain.
HOS 5:10 The princes of Israel have become like thieves who move boundary stones. On them I will pour out my wrath like a flood.
HOS 5:11 Ephraim will be oppressed, crushed by judgment, for they are determined to go after vanity.
HOS 5:12 So I am like a moth to Ephraim, like rottenness to the house of Judah.
HOS 5:13 For when Ephraim saw their sickness and Israel their wound, Ephraim turned to Assyria, to its patron king. But he cannot heal you nor relieve you of your wound.
HOS 5:14 For I myself will be like a lion to Ephraim, like a young lion to the house of Judah. I, yes I, will rend and go my way, I will carry off and none will rescue.
HOS 5:15 I will return to my place, until in remorse they seek my presence. When they are in distress they will quickly seek me,
HOS 6:1 saying, ‘Come let us return to the Lord, for he has torn us but he will heal us, he has injured us but he will bandage our wounds,
HOS 6:2 he will revive in a couple of days, on the third day he will raise us up again, to live in his presence.
HOS 6:3 Let us know, let us eagerly seek to know the Lord. His coming is as sure as the sunrise. He will come to us like the winter rain, as the spring rain that waters the earth.’
HOS 6:4 What can I make of you, Ephraim! What can I make of you, Judah! Your love is like a morning cloud, like the dew which early goes away.
HOS 6:5 That is why I have hewn them by the prophets, I have slain them by the words of my mouth. My judgment is like the light that goes forth,
HOS 6:6 for it is love that I delight in and not sacrifice, and knowledge of God and not burnt offerings.
HOS 6:7 But they after the manner of men have transgressed the covenant, there they have played me false.
HOS 6:8 Gilead is a city of evildoers, tracked with bloody footprints,
HOS 6:9 and as bandits lie in wait for a man, so a band of priests murder on the way to Shechem. How terrible is the evil they do!
HOS 6:10 In Bethel I have seen a horrible thing. There Ephraim plays the prostitute, Israel is defiled.
HOS 6:11 Judah for you also a harvest is set. When I would restore the fortunes of my people,
HOS 7:1 when I would heal Israel, then Ephrain’s guilt is revealed, and Samaria’s crimes are seen, how they practise fraud and the thief enters in, while outside bandits plunder.
HOS 7:2 But it never crosses their minds that I remember their wickedness. Now their misdeeds surround them, they are always before my face.
HOS 7:3 Their wickedness amuses the king, and their lying gladdens the princes,
HOS 7:4 since they are all of them adulterers. Their desire to do evil burns like an oven heated by the baker, so hot that he need not stir the fire, from the kneading of the dough, until it rises.
HOS 7:5 On our king’s festival day, the princes are flushed with fever from wine. He stretched forth his hand with the contemptuous,
HOS 7:6 for like an oven their heart burns with treachery, all night their anger smoulders, in the morning it blazes into a flame of fire.
HOS 7:7 All of them glow like an oven, they devour their rulers. All their kings have fallen. There is none among them who calls to me.
HOS 7:8 Ephraim – he lets himself be mixed among the peoples, Ephraim – he has become a cake unturned.
HOS 7:9 Strangers have devoured his strength, but he does not know it. His hair is sprinkled with grey, but he does not notice.
HOS 7:10 Israel’s arrogance testifies against them yet they do not return to the Lord their God, and in all this they do not seek him.
HOS 7:11 Ephraim is like a simple, silly dove: to Egypt they call, after Assyria they go,
HOS 7:12 wherever they turn I will spread my net over them, like birds of the sky I will bring them down, I will catch them when I hear them gathering.
HOS 7:13 Woe to them, for they have strayed from me! Destruction to them, for they have been untrue to me. Although it was I who redeemed them, they speak lies about me.
HOS 7:14 They have never cried to me with their hearts, but they are always wailing on their beds. They gather to beg for corn and new wine, but they turn away from me.
HOS 7:15 Although it was I who trained and strengthened their arms, concerning me they plan only evil.
HOS 7:16 They turn away from the Most High. They have become like a bow that swerves. Their princes will fall by the sword, because of the insolence of their tongues. The land of Egypt will mock them.
HOS 8:1 Put the horn to your mouth! An eagle swoops down upon the house of the Lord because they have transgressed my covenant, trespassed against my law.
HOS 8:2 To me they continually cry, ‘My God, we Israel, we know you!’
HOS 8:3 But Israel has spurned that which is good, so let the foe pursue him.
HOS 8:4 They themselves have made kings but without my consent. They have made princes but without my knowledge. Out of their silver and gold, they have made idols to their destruction!
HOS 8:5 Your calf idol, O Samaria, is distasteful. My anger is kindled against them. How long will they escape punishment?
HOS 8:6 Israel made the thing: a workman made it. It is not a god! Samaria’s calf will become mere splinters.
HOS 8:7 They sow the wind and will reap the whirlwind. A shoot which has no stalk, yields no fruit If it should yield, strangers would devour it.
HOS 8:8 Israel is devoured. Already it lies discarded among the nations like a worthless pot.
HOS 8:9 For by themselves they have gone up to Assyria like a wild donkey which wanders by itself. Ephraim pays for love
HOS 8:10 but even if they sell themselves among the nations, I will round them up. Soon the kings and princes will writhe under the burden of tribute!
HOS 8:11 For as many altars as Ephraim has erected, they are to him altars for sinning,
HOS 8:12 were I to write for him ever so many instructions, they would be regarded as from a stranger.
HOS 8:13 The people love sacrifice, and so they offer sacrifices, meat, and so they eat it, although the Lord is not pleased with them, so now he will remember their guilt, and punish their sins. Back to Egypt with them!
HOS 8:14 For Israel forgot his Maker and built palaces, and Judah multiplied fortified cities. But I will send fire upon her cities, and it will devour her strongholds.
HOS 9:1 Rejoice not too loudly, Israel, like the nations, for you have commited adultery, being untrue to your God. You have loved a prostitute’s wages on every threshing floor.
HOS 9:2 Threshing floor and wine vat won’t feed them, the new wine will fail them.
HOS 9:3 They will not stay in the Lord’s land, but Ephraim will return to Egypt, and in Assyria they will eat what is unclean.
HOS 9:4 They will not pour out libations of wine to the Lord, nor please him with their sacrifices. Their bread will be like the bread of mourners: all who eat it will defile themselves. For their bread will be only for their hunger, it will not come into the Lord’s temple.
HOS 9:5 What will you do on the day of the festival? Or on the day of the Lord’s feast?
HOS 9:6 Even if they flee from destruction, Egypt will gather them, Memphis will bury them. Nettles will take possession of their treasure of silver, thorns will push into their tents.
HOS 9:7 The days of punishment are come, the days of recompense are at hand, as soon the Israelites will know! ‘The prophet is a fool, the inspired man is raving mad!’ It is because of the greatness of your iniquity and the greatness of your hatred.
HOS 9:8 Ephraim acts the spy with my God, a prophet finds the snares of a fowler are in all his ways. In the house of his God they lay hostile plots,
HOS 9:9 they commit crimes as in the days of Gibeah, God will remember their iniquity. He will punish their sin.
HOS 9:10 I found Israel like finding grapes in the wilderness. I saw your ancestors like they were the first fruit on a fig tree, but as soon as they came to Baal-peor, they consecrated themselves to shamefulness, and became as abominable as the object of their love.
HOS 9:11 Ephraim – like a bird his glory flies away. There will be no more birth, no more motherhood, no more conception.
HOS 9:12 Even though they bring up their children, I will bereave them until not one is left. Woe to them when I turn away from them!
HOS 9:13 Ephraim – planted like Tyre in a meadow, But Ephraim too must lead forth their children to slaughter.
HOS 9:14 Give them, Lord – what will you give? Give them a miscarrying womb and shrivelled up breasts!
HOS 9:15 All their evil began in Gilgal, there I learned to hate them. Because of the evil of their deeds I will drive them out of my house. I will no longer love them, for all their princes are rebels.
HOS 9:16 Ephraim is blighted, their root withered. If they do bear children, I will slay the darlings of their womb,
HOS 9:17 My God will reject them because they have not listened to him, and they will become wanderers among the nations.
HOS 10:1 A luxuriant vine is Israel. He bore fruit lavishly. In proportion to the increase of his fruit he increased altars to idols. In proportion to the beauty of his land he made beautiful the sacred pillars.
HOS 10:2 Their heart is false, now they must be punished. God himself will break the necks of their altars, he will destroy their sacred pillars.
HOS 10:3 Yes, soon they will be saying, ‘We have no king, for we have not revered the Lord, and a king, what could he do for us anyway?’
HOS 10:4 Speaking words, perjuring themselves, making agreements, and litigation springs up like a poisonous weed in a ploughed field.
HOS 10:5 The inhabitants of Samaria will tremble with fear for their calf of Beth-aven. Its people will mourn over it, and so will its priests, who had rejoiced for its glory, now departed from it.
HOS 10:6 It will be carried off to Assyria as a present to the patron king. Disgrace will Ephraim bear and Israel will be ashamed of its idol.
HOS 10:7 As for Samaria, her king will disappear, like foam on the face of the waters.
HOS 10:8 And the high places of Aven will be destroyed, the shrines of Israel’s sin, thorns and thistles will grow on their altars, and they will say to the mountains, ‘Cover us,’ and to the hills, ‘Fall upon us.’
HOS 10:9 From the time of Gibeah, Israel has sinned. There they took their stand. Will not war overtake them in Gibeah because of the wicked?
HOS 10:10 When I please, I will punish them. Nations will gather against them to chain them for their double crimes.
HOS 10:11 Ephraim indeed was a trained heifer that loved to thresh grain, and I myself laid a yoke upon his fair neck, I made Ephraim draw and Judah must plough, Jacob must turn the soil for himself.
HOS 10:12 Sow for yourselves righteousness, reap the fruits of love. Break up your fallow ground, for it is time to seek the Lord, so righteousness may come to you.
HOS 10:13 But you have ploughed wickedness, iniquity have you reaped. You have eaten the fruit of lies. Because you have trusted in your own path, in the multitude of your warriors,
HOS 10:14 the alarm of war will sound in your cities and all your fortresses will be ruined, as Shalman laid in ruins Beth-arbel in the day of battle, when mothers were dashed to pieces over their children.
HOS 10:15 Thus will I do to you, Bethel, because of the enormity of your wickedness. When dawn breaks, so will the king of Israel be broken.
HOS 11:1 When Israel was young, then I began to love him, and out of Egypt I called my son.
HOS 11:2 The more I called them, the further they went away from me. They kept sacrificing to Baals and making offerings to idols.
HOS 11:3 Yet it was I who taught Ephraim to walk, taking them up in my arms, but they did not know that I healed them.
HOS 11:4 With humane cords I ever drew them, with bands of love. I was to them as one who lifts up the yoke from off their jaws, and bending toward them, I gave them food to eat.
HOS 11:5 No! They return to the land of Egypt, Assyria will be their king, for they have refused to return to me.
HOS 11:6 Therefore the swords will whirl in their cities, will devour in their fortresses.
HOS 11:7 For my people are bent in rebellion against me, even if they call on the Most High he will not raise them.
HOS 11:8 How can I give you up, Ephraim! Give you over, Israel! How am I to give you up as Admah! Make you like Zeboim! My heart asserts itself, my sympathies are all aglow.
HOS 11:9 I will not carry into effect the fierceness of my anger, I will not turn to destroy Ephraim, for God am I, and not man, holy in the midst of you, therefore I will not consume.
HOS 11:10 They will follow after the Lord. Like a lion he will roar, and when he roars his children will come trembling from the west.
HOS 11:11 They will come trembling like the birds from Egypt, like doves from the land of Assyria. And I will bring them back to their houses, – declares the Lord.
HOS 11:12 Ephraim has encompassed me with falsehood, and the house of Israel with deceit. But Judah still wanders with God faithful to the Holy One.
HOS 12:1 Ephraim herds the wind and hunts the sirocco. All day long they heap up falsehood and fraud, make a treaty with Assyria, and sends tribute of olive oil to Egypt.
HOS 12:2 The Lord has a charge to bring against Israel, to punish Jacob for his acts, according to his deeds will he requite him,
HOS 12:3 In the womb he supplanted his brother, in manhood he wrestled with God,
HOS 12:4 He wrestled with the angel and prevailed, he wept and sought his blessing. At Bethel the Lord found him, and there he spoke with us.
HOS 12:5 And the Lord is the God of hosts, the Lord is his name!
HOS 12:6 So now, by the help of your God, return. Keep true love and justice. Trust in your God without ceasing.
HOS 12:7 A merchant uses false scales: They love to defraud.
HOS 12:8 Ephraim says, ‘Yes, I have become rich, I have secured wealth for myself. But despite my gains no one will find a crime I can be convicted of!’
HOS 12:9 I am the Lord your God, ever since the land of Egypt. I will make you again dwell in tents, as in days of old.
HOS 12:10 I spoke continually by the prophets. It was I who multiplied visions, and spoke in parables through the prophets.
HOS 12:11 In Gilead is iniquity, they will come to nothing. In Gilgal they sacrifice bulls, so their altars will be as stone heaps, among the furrows of the field.
HOS 12:12 And Jacob fled to the territory of Aram, and Israel worked to earn a wife: for a wife he herded sheep.
HOS 12:13 The Lord brought Israel up from Egypt by a prophet, and by a prophet Israel was guarded.
HOS 12:14 Ephraim has given bitter provocation. His Lord will leave upon him his guilt of bloodshed, and for his contempt he will repay him.
HOS 13:1 When Ephraim used to speak there was trembling; a prince was he in Israel. But he incurred guilt through Baal and died.
HOS 13:2 And now they go on sinning. They make for themselves molten gods – idols of silver, skilfully made, wholly the work of smiths. Yet to such they sacrifice! And they who sacrifice kiss calf idols!
HOS 13:3 Therefore they will be like the morning mist, like the dew that early disappears, like the chaff which blows away from the threshing floor, like the smoke from the window.
HOS 13:4 Yet it was I, the Lord your God, ever since the land of Egypt, you know no other god but me, nor has there been any saviour except me.
HOS 13:5 It was I who shepherded you in the wilderness, in the land of burning heat.
HOS 13:6 When they were pastured they became full, when they were full their hearts became proud. Therefore they forgot me!
HOS 13:7 So now I will be to them like a lion, like a leopard will I lay in wait by the path.
HOS 13:8 I will fall upon them like a bear robbed of her cubs, I will tear open their chests, like a lion will devour them, and like a wild beast will tear them in pieces.
HOS 13:9 You are destroyed, Israel, by me, your only helper.
HOS 13:10 I want to rule you! Where are your princes in your cities, those of whom you demanded, ‘Give me kings and princes.’
HOS 13:11 I give you kings in my anger, and take them away in my wrath.
HOS 13:12 Ephrahn’s iniquity is gathered up, his sin is laid by in store.
HOS 13:13 The pangs of childbirth come upon him, but he is an unwise child. For this is no time to refuse to leave the womb!
HOS 13:14 Should I deliver them from the power of Sheol? Should I redeem them from death? Death, where are your plagues? Sheol, where is your pestilence? Compassion is forever hidden from my eyes.
HOS 13:15 Though he is flourishing among his brothers, there will come an east wind, the Lord’s wind, coming up from the wilderness. His fountain will dry up, his spring will be parched. The wind will strip the treasury, all the precious things.
HOS 13:16 Samaria will bear her guilt, for she has rebelled against her God. They will fall by the sword, their children dashed to pieces, their pregnant women ripped open.
HOS 14:1 Return, Israel, to the Lord your God, for you have stumbled in your iniquity.
HOS 14:2 Take words of repentance with you, and return to the Lord your God. Say to him: Wholly pardon our iniquity, accept that which is good, instead of sacrificing bulls, we offer our praise.
HOS 14:3 Assyria will not save us, nor Egyptian warhorses, and we will no more call the work of our hands our gods. For in you orphan Israel finds mercy.
HOS 14:4 ‘I will heal their apostasy, I will love them freely, now that my anger is turned away from them,
HOS 14:5 I will be as dew to Israel. He will blossom like the lily, he will plant his roots like the cedars of Lebanon,
HOS 14:6 his saplings will spread out, his beauty will be like that of the olive tree, his fragrance like the cedars of Lebanon.
HOS 14:7 People will return and dwell in my shade, they will bring life to new grain. They will sprout like the vine, and their renown will be like that of the wine of Lebanon.
HOS 14:8 Ephraim – what have I to do with idols! It is I the Lord who respond to him and look after him. I am like an evergreen cypress, from me is your fruit found.
HOS 14:9 Whoever is wise, let him discern these things, prudent, let him perceive them; For the Lord’s ways are straight, and the righteous walk in them, but the wicked stumble in them.
JOE 1:1 The Lord’s message that came to Joel, son of Pethuel.
JOE 1:2 Hear this, elders, pay attention, all inhabitants of the land. Has anything like this happened in your days, or in the days of your ancestors?
JOE 1:3 Recount it to your children; let your children tell it to their children, and their children to the generation that follows.
JOE 1:4 That which the cutting locust has left, the swarming locust has eaten, that which the swarming locust has left, the hopping locust has eaten, and that which the hopping locust has left, the destroying locust has eaten.
JOE 1:5 Awake, drunkards, and weep, and wail, all drinkers of wine; the new wine is cut off from your mouth.
JOE 1:6 For a nation has come up on my land, powerful, and numberless; its teeth are the teeth of a lion, and its jaw-teeth are like those of a lioness.
JOE 1:7 It has laid waste my vines, and barked my fig tree; it has peeled and cast it away, bleached are the branches.
JOE 1:8 Wail as a bride, clad in sack-cloth, for the husband of her youth.
JOE 1:9 Cut off are the cereal and drink-offerings from the house of the Lord; in mourning are the priests, who minister at the Lord’s altar.
JOE 1:10 The fields are blasted, the land is in mourning, for ruined is the corn, the new wine fails and the oil is dried up.
JOE 1:11 Be dismayed, farmers; wail, vine-dressers. For the wheat and the barley; for the harvest is lost from the fields.
JOE 1:12 The vine fails to bear fruit, and the fig tree is drooping; the pomegranate, palm, and apple, all the trees of the field are dried up. The people’s joy withers.
JOE 1:13 Put on sackcloth, and beat your breasts, priests; wail, ministers of the altar; come, lie all night in sack-cloth, ministers of God; for cereal-offering and drink-offering are cut off from the house of your God.
JOE 1:14 Sanctify a fast, summon an assembly, gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord your God, cry to the Lord:
JOE 1:15 Alas for the day! Near at hand is the day of the Lord, and as destruction from the Almighty it comes.
JOE 1:16 Is not food cut off from before us, gladness and joy from the house of our God?
JOE 1:17 The grains shrivel under their hoes, the storehouses are desolate, the barns broken down, for the corn is withered.
JOE 1:18 How the herds of cattle bellow in distress, for they have no pasture! The flocks of sheep are forlorn.
JOE 1:19 To you, the Lord, I cry. For fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness, and flame has scorched all the trees of the field.
JOE 1:20 The wild animals also look up to you longingly, for the water-courses are dried up, and fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness.
JOE 2:1 Blow a horn in Zion, sound an alarm in my holy mountain, let all the inhabitants of the land tremble, for the day of the Lord comes, for near is
JOE 2:2 the day of darkness and gloom, the day of cloud and thick darkness! Like the light of dawn scattered over the mountains, a people great and powerful; its like has not been from of old, neither will be any more after it, even to the years of coming ages.
JOE 2:3 Before them the fire devours, and behind them a flame burns; like the garden of Eden is the land before them, and after them it is a desolate desert, nothing escapes them.
JOE 2:4 Their appearance is as the appearance of horses, and like horsemen they charge.
JOE 2:5 Like the sound of chariots on the tops of the mountains they leap, like the crackle of flames devouring stubble, like a mighty people preparing for battle.
JOE 2:6 Peoples are in anguish before them, all faces grow pale.
JOE 2:7 Like mighty men they run, like warriors they mount up a wall, they march each by himself, they break not their ranks,
JOE 2:8 none jostles the other. They march each in his path. They fall upon the weapons without breaking.
JOE 2:9 They scour the city, they run on the wall. They climb up into the houses. Like a thief they enter the windows.
JOE 2:10 Earth trembles before them, the sky quakes, the sun and moon become dark, and the stars withdraw their shining;
JOE 2:11 and the Lord utters his voice before his army, for his host is exceedingly great. Mighty is he who performs his word. For great is the day of the Lord, it is terrible, who can endure it?
JOE 2:12 But now this is the message of the Lord: Turn to me with all your heart, and with fasting and weeping and mourning,
JOE 2:13 rend your hearts and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God; for he indeed is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and plenteous in love, and relents of the evil.
JOE 2:14 Who knows but he will turn and relent, and leave a blessing behind him, a cereal and drink-offering for the Lord your God.
JOE 2:15 Blow a horn in Zion, sanctify a fast, summon an assembly,
JOE 2:16 gather the people, make holy the congregation, assemble the elders, gather the children, and the infants at the breast. Let the bridegroom come forth from his chamber, and the bride from her bridal tent.
JOE 2:17 Between the porch and the altar, let the priests, the ministers of the Lord weep aloud, let them say: Spare, the Lord, your people. Make not your heritage an object of reproach, for the heathen to mock them. Why should it be said among the nations, “Where is their God?”
JOE 2:18 Then the Lord became deeply concerned for his land, and took pity upon his people,
JOE 2:19 and the Lord answered and said to his people: I will send you corn, wine, and oil. You will be satisfied. I will not make you again an object of scorn among the nations,
JOE 2:20 I will remove far from you the northern foe, and I will drive it into a land barren and desolate, its front into the eastern sea, and its rear to the western sea. And from it a stench will arise. He has done great things!
JOE 2:21 Fear not, land, exult. Rejoice for the Lord has done great things!
JOE 2:22 Fear not, animals of the field. For the pastures of the wilderness are putting forth new grass, for the trees bear their fruit, fig tree and vine yield full harvest.
JOE 2:23 Be glad, then, children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God, for he has given you the early rain in just measure, and poured down upon you the winter rain, and sent the latter rain as before.
JOE 2:24 The threshing floors will be full of grain, and the vats will overflow with new wine and oil.
JOE 2:25 I will repay you for the years which the swarming locust has eaten. The hopping, the destroying, and the cutting locusts, my great army which I sent among you, and my people will never again be put to shame.
JOE 2:26 You will eat your food and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord your God, who has dealt so wonderfully by you,
JOE 2:27 and you will know that I am in the midst of Israel, that I am the Lord your God and none else, and my people will never again be put to shame.
JOE 2:28 Afterwards, I will pour out my spirit on everyone. Your sons and your daughters will prophesy, your old men will dream dreams. Your young men will see visions,
JOE 2:29 and even on your male and female slaves in those days, I will pour out my spirit.
JOE 2:30 And I will show signs in the sky and on earth: Blood and fire and pillars of smoke.
JOE 2:31 The sun will be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood before the coming of the great and terrible day of the Lord.
JOE 2:32 But whoever will call upon the name of the Lord will be saved. For in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem there will be those who escape, even as the Lord has said, and among the fugitives those whom the Lord calls.
JOE 3:1 For, in those days and in that time, when I bring back again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem,
JOE 3:2 I will also gather all the nations and bring them down into the Valley of Jehoshaphat, and there I will enter into judgment with them for my people and my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and divided my land.
JOE 3:3 They have cast lots for my people. They have traded boys for prostitutes, and sold girls for wine, and drunk it.
JOE 3:4 What are you to me, Tyre and Sidon and all the districts of Philistia? Were you repaying any deed of mine, or were you doing something for me? Quickly will I return your deed upon your heads.
JOE 3:5 You who have taken my silver and my gold, and you have brought my goodly jewels into your palaces,
JOE 3:6 you have sold the people of Judah and of Jerusalem to the Greeks, so that you might remove them far from their own borders.
JOE 3:7 I am about to stir them up from the place to which you have sold them, and I will turn your deeds upon your own head.
JOE 3:8 I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hands of the people of Judah, and they will sell them to the Sabeans, to a nation far off, for the Lord has spoken.
JOE 3:9 Proclaim this among the nations, sanctify war. Arouse the warriors, let all the fighting men muster and go up.
JOE 3:10 Beat your ploughshares into swords, and your pruning-hooks into lances; let the weak say, I, indeed, am strong.
JOE 3:11 Bestir yourselves and come, all you nations round about. Quickly gather yourselves together, ask the Lord to bring his warriors.
JOE 3:12 Let the nations rouse themselves and come up to the Valley of Jehoshaphat, for there will I sit to judge all the surrounding nations.
JOE 3:13 Put in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; go in, tread, for the wine press is full. The vats overflow, for great is their wickedness.
JOE 3:14 Noisy multitudes, noisy multitudes in the valley of decision. For near is the Lord’s day in the valley of decision!
JOE 3:15 Sun and moon have turned dark, and the stars withdrawn their shining.
JOE 3:16 Whenever the Lord roars from Zion and utters his voice from Jerusalem, earth and sky quake; but the Lord is a refuge to his people, and a fortress to the people of Israel.
JOE 3:17 And you will know that I am the Lord your God, I who dwells in Zion, my holy mountain, and Jerusalem will be holy, and strangers will not pass through her any more.
JOE 3:18 In that day, the mountains will drop sweet wine, the hills will flow with milk, all the channels of Judah will flow with water, a fountain will spring from the house of Judah, and will water the Valley of Shittim.
JOE 3:19 Egypt will become a desolation, and Edom a wilderness, because of the violence done to the people of Judah, because they shed innocent blood in their land,
JOE 3:20 Judah will remain inhabited forever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation.
JOE 3:21 I will avenge their blood which I have not yet avenged. The Lord lives in Zion!
AMO 1:1 The message of Amos, one of the sheep breeders of Tekoa, which he saw concerning Israel in the reign of King Uzziah of Judah, and in the reign of Jeroboam the son of King Joash of Israel, two years before the earthquake.
AMO 1:2 Amos said: Whenever the Lord roars from Zion, and utters his voice from Jerusalem, the pastures of the shepherds dry up, the top of Carmel becomes arid.
AMO 1:3 The Lord says: For Damascus’ three crimes – no, four! – I will not rescind my judgment. They have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron.
AMO 1:4 Therefore I will send fire on Hazael’s house, it will devour the palaces of Ben-hadad.
AMO 1:5 I will break open the gate of Damascus, I will wipe out those who live in the valley of Aven and the sceptred ruler of Beth-Eden. The people of Aram will go into captivity in Kir, says the Lord.
AMO 1:6 The Lord says: For Gaza’s three crimes – no, four! – I will not rescind my judgment. They carried away captive a whole nation, sold them as slaves to Edom.
AMO 1:7 Therefore I will send fire on the wall of Gaza, and it will devour her palaces.
AMO 1:8 And I will wipe out those who live in Ashdod, and the sceptred ruler of Askelon. I will turn my hand against Ekron, and the remnant of the Philistines will perish, says the Lord.
AMO 1:9 The Lord says: For Tyre’s three crimes – no, four! – I will not rescind my judgment. They carried away captive a whole people into exile in Edom, and did not remember the brotherly covenant.
AMO 1:10 So I will send fire on the walls of Tyre. It will devour her palaces.
AMO 1:11 The Lord says: For Edom’s three crimes – no, four! – I will not rescind my judgment. They pursued their relatives with the sword, stilled their pity, cherished their anger continually, retained their fury forever.
AMO 1:12 So I will send a fire into Teman. It will destroy the palaces of Bozrah.
AMO 1:13 The Lord says: For Ammonites’ three crimes – no, four! – I will not rescind my judgment. They have ripped open pregnant women in Gilead, in their lust for land.
AMO 1:14 So I will kindle a fire on the wall of Rabbah. It will destroy her palaces, with a war-cry in the day of battle, with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind.
AMO 1:15 Their king will go into exile, he and his nobles together, says the Lord.
AMO 2:1 The Lord says: For Moab’s three crimes – no, four! – I will not rescind my judgment. They have burned to lime the bones of the king of Edom,
AMO 2:2 to desecrate the dead. So I will send a fire into Moab. It will devour the palaces of Kirioth, with a war-cry, with the sound of trumpets.
AMO 2:3 I will kill the ruler, all his nobles I will slay with him, says the Lord.
AMO 2:4 The Lord says: For Judah’s three crimes – no, four! – I will not rescind my judgment. They have rejected the law of the Lord and have not kept his statutes. Instead their false gods their ancestors followed, have led them astray.
AMO 2:5 So I will send a fire on Judah. It will devour the palaces of Jerusalem.
AMO 2:6 The Lord says: For Israel’s three crimes – no, four! – I will not rescind my judgment. They sell the righteous for money, the needy for a pair of shoes.
AMO 2:7 They trample on the head of the poor, push the humble out of the way. Father and son go to the same temple girl, and so profane my holy name.
AMO 2:8 They stretch themselves on garments taken in pledges beside every altar, and they drink the wine of those who have been fined in the house of their God.
AMO 2:9 It was I who destroyed the Amorites for your sake, whose height was like that of the cedars, as strong as oaks. I destroyed their fruit from above and their roots from below.
AMO 2:10 It was I who brought you up from the land of Egypt, led you forty years in the wilderness, brought you here to possess the land of the Amorites.
AMO 2:11 I raised up some of your sons to be prophets some of your youths to be Nazirites. Is not this indeed so, Israelites? says the Lord.
AMO 2:12 But you made the Nazirites drink wine and banned the prophets from prophesying.
AMO 2:13 Listen! It is I who will make you groan in your places, as a wagon groans under its load of grain.
AMO 2:14 Then flight will fail the swift, and the strength of the strongest will be useless. The warrior will not save his life,
AMO 2:15 the archer will not stand firm, the swift of foot will not escape, the horseman will not save his life.
AMO 2:16 The bravest of warriors will flee away naked in that day, says the Lord.
AMO 3:1 Listen to this message, Israelites, which the Lord has spoken against you, against the whole nation that I brought out of Egypt:
AMO 3:2 You alone have I cared for of all the nations of the world, this is why I will punish you for your crimes.
AMO 3:3 Do two walk together unless they agreed to meet?
AMO 3:4 Does a lion roar in the forest when there is no prey for him? Does a young lion cry out in his den unless he has caught something?
AMO 3:5 Does a bird swoop down into a trap if no bait is set for it? Does a trap spring up from the ground if nothing sets it off?
AMO 3:6 Can a trumpet be blown in a city and the people not tremble? Can disaster strike a city and the Lord not have caused it?
AMO 3:7 Surely the Lord God does nothing without revealing his purpose to his servants the prophets.
AMO 3:8 The lion has roared; who does not fear? The Lord God has spoken; who will not prophesy?
AMO 3:9 Proclaim over the palaces in Ashdod, and over the palaces in the land of Egypt: Gather upon the mountain of Samaria, and see the violent turmoil, the acts of oppression in her midst.
AMO 3:10 For they do not know how to do right. They are heaping up violence and oppression in their palaces, says the Lord.
AMO 3:11 Therefore the Lord God says: An enemy will surround the land, he will strip your strength from you. and your palaces will be looted.
AMO 3:12 The Lord says: Just as a shepherd rescues from the jaws of a lion two shinbones or a piece of an ear, so the Israelites living in Sameria will be rescued – with the corner of a couch, and the damask of a divan!
AMO 3:13 Listen and testify against the house of Jacob, says the Lord God, the God of hosts.
AMO 3:14 On the day when I punish Israel for their crimes, I will also visit in judgment the altars of Bethel, the horns of the altar will be hacked off, and they will fall to the ground.
AMO 3:15 I will destroy the winter houses together with the summer houses and the houses of ivory will perish. Many great houses will be swept away, says the Lord.
AMO 4:1 Listen to this message, women of Sameria, you well-fed cows of Bashan, who oppress the poor and crush the needy, who say to your husbands, ‘Bring us another drink!’
AMO 4:2 The Lord God has sworn by his holiness: The time is coming when you will be carried away in baskets, your children carried away in fish-baskets,
AMO 4:3 and through the breaches in the city wall you will go, thrown out on the garbage dump, says the Lord.
AMO 4:4 Come to Bethel and transgress, at Gilgald increase your transgression. Bring your sacrifices in the morning, every third day your tithes!
AMO 4:5 Burn some leavened bread as a thank-offering, proclaim aloud your voluntary offerings, for you love to do this, Israelites! says the Lord God.
AMO 4:6 But it was I who gave to you empty stomachs in all your cities, and lack of bread in all your towns, yet you have not returned to me, says the Lord.
AMO 4:7 It was I who withheld from you the rain, sending rain on one city, while on another I allowed no rain. One field received rain, while a field without rain withered.
AMO 4:8 People from two or three cities ranged as far as another city for drinking water, and still they did not have enough, yet you did not return to me, says the Lord.
AMO 4:9 I struck you with blight and mildew, I laid waste your gardens and vineyards. The swarming locust devoured your fig and your olive trees, yet you did not return to me, says the Lord.
AMO 4:10 I sent plague among you like the plagues of Egypt, I slew your youths with the sword, your horses raided away, I caused the stench of your camps to rise in your nostrils, yet you did not return to me, says the Lord.
AMO 4:11 I wrought a destruction among you, as God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah. You were like a stick snatched from the fire, yet you did not return to me, says the Lord.
AMO 4:12 Therefore this is what I will do to you, Israel, and because I am about to do this to you, prepare to meet your God, Israel.
AMO 4:13 He is here! He who forms the mountains, creates the wind, declares to his thoughts to mortals, makes dawn and darkness, treads upon the heights of the earth, the Lord, the God of hosts, is his name!
AMO 5:1 Listen to the words of the funeral song I am singing for you, Israel:
AMO 5:2 Fallen, no more to rise, is the virgin Israel! Hurled down upon her own soil she lies, with no one to lift her up!
AMO 5:3 For the Lord God says this: The city that marches out with a thousand soldiers has only a hundred left, and the one that marches out with a hundred has only ten left.
AMO 5:4 For the Lord says this to Israel: Seek me and live,
AMO 5:5 But do not seek Bethel, do not enter Gilgal, do not go over to Beer-sheba. For Gilgal will enter exile, and Bethel will go to destruction.
AMO 5:6 Seek the Lord and live, or he will cast fire on the house of Joseph, and it will devour and there will be no one to quench it for Bethel.
AMO 5:7 You who turn judgment to bitter wormwood, and cast righteousness into the dirt:
AMO 5:8 He who made the Pleiades and Orion, who turns deep darkness into dawn, who darkens day again into night, who summons the waters of the sea, and pours them out on the earth’s surface, the Lord is his name!
AMO 5:9 He causes destruction to burst over the strong. He brings devastation on the fortress.
AMO 5:10 You who hate the arbiters at the city gate, and abhor anyone who speaks the truth:
AMO 5:11 Because you trample on the weak, and tax their grain, although you have built houses of hewn stone, you will not live in them, although you have planted charming vineyards, you will not drink their wine.
AMO 5:12 For I know how many are your crimes, and how great are your sins! You persecutors of the righteous, takers of bribes! You deny the poor their justice at the city gate.
AMO 5:13 It would be wise to keep quiet in such an evil time.
AMO 5:14 Seek good and not evil, that you may live, so the Lord, God of hosts, may be with you, as you have claimed he is.
AMO 5:15 Hate evil and love good, establish justice at the city gate. Perhaps the Lord, the God of hosts, will be gracious to a surviving remnant of Joseph.
AMO 5:16 Therefore the Lord, the God of hosts, says: In all the public squares there will be wailing, in every street the sound of mourning. They will summon the farmers to mourning, and professional mourners to wailing.
AMO 5:17 In all vineyards there will be lamenting, when I pass through your midst, says the Lord.
AMO 5:18 Fools who long for the day of the Lord! What does the day of the Lord mean to you? It is darkness, and not light.
AMO 5:19 It is as when one flees from a lion, and is attacked by a bear, as when one reaches home, leans his hand on the wall, and a snake bites him.
AMO 5:20 Won’t the Lord’s day be darkness and not light, murky darkness without a ray of light in it?
AMO 5:21 I hate, I despise your feasts, I will not smell the savour of your festivals,
AMO 5:22 I will not be pleased with your burnt offerings, your grain offerings, I will not accept the peace offerings of your fattened calves.
AMO 5:23 Spare me the noise of your songs, I will not listen to the melody of your lyres.
AMO 5:24 But let justice roll on as a flood of waters, and righteousness like an unfailing stream.
AMO 5:25 Was it only sacrifices and grain offerings you brought me during the forty years in the wilderness, Israel?
AMO 5:26 But now you will lift up your “king” Sikkuth and “star god” Kiyyun, your idols which you have made for yourselves,
AMO 5:27 as I drive you into exile beyond Damascus, says the Lord, whose name is the God of hosts.
AMO 6:1 Sorrow awaits who are carefree in Zion, overconfident on the mountain of Samaria! The elite of this, the best of nations, on whom the people of Israel rest their hopes!
AMO 6:2 You say to the people: Cross over to Calneh and see, go from there to Hamath the great, then go down to Gath of the Philistines: Are they better than these kingdoms? Is their territory larger than yours?
AMO 6:3 You push away all thoughts of the evil day, yet have instituted a rule of violence.
AMO 6:4 They lie on ivory couches, sprawl on their divans, eat choice lambs from the flock, and fattened calves from the stall.
AMO 6:5 They idly sing to the sound of the lyre, thinking themselves songwriters like David,
AMO 6:6 they drink bowlfuls of wine, and anoint themselves with the finest of oil. But they do not grieve over the ruin of Joseph.
AMO 6:7 Therefore now they must go into exile at the head of the captives, and hushed will be the revelry of the sprawlers.
AMO 6:8 The Lord God, the Lord, the God of hosts, has sworn by himself: I abhor the pride of Jacob, I hate his palaces, therefore I will deliver up the city and all that is in it to their enemies.
AMO 6:9 If ten people remain in one house, then they will die.
AMO 6:10 When the uncle and another member of the family of a dead man come to carry the body out of the house for burial, they will call to someone in a corner of the house, “Any more there?” and he will answer, “No”, and then he will add, “Be quiet!” – for the name of the Lord must not be mentioned.
AMO 6:11 Look! The Lord is giving the command! He will smash the large house to bits, the small house into fragments.
AMO 6:12 Do horses gallop on crags? Does one plough the sea with oxen? Yet you turn justice into poison weed, and the fruit of righteousness into bitter wormwood.
AMO 6:13 You who are so proud of capturing Lo-debar, who say, “Have we not by our own strength taken Karnaim for ourselves?”
AMO 6:14 I am now raising up against you, Israel, a nation, says the Lord, the God of hosts. They will oppress you, from the entrance of Hamath to the brook of the Arabah.
AMO 7:1 This is what the Lord God showed me: he was forming a swarm of locusts, when the late spring grass began to come up after the king’s share had been harvested.
AMO 7:2 And when they had finished devouring all the land’s vegetation, I said: ‘Lord God, forgive, I beg you! How can Jacob survive, for he is so helpless?’
AMO 7:3 The Lord relented. This will not happen,’ said the Lord.
AMO 7:4 This is what he showed me: the Lord God was giving command to execute judgment by fire. It burned up the great deep, and had begun to devour the fields, and I said:
AMO 7:5 ‘Lord God, forgive, I beg you! How can Jacob survive, for he is so helpless?’
AMO 7:6 The Lord relented. ‘This will not happen either,’ said the Lord.
AMO 7:7 This is what the Lord God showed me: the Lord was standing beside a wall built with a plumb line, with a plumb line in his hand.
AMO 7:8 And the Lord said to me, ‘What do you see, Amos?’ And I answered, ‘A plumb line,’ Then the Lord said, ‘Watch: I am setting a plumb line in the midst of my people Israel, I will no longer overlook their crookedness.
AMO 7:9 And the high places of Isaac will be desolate, the sanctuaries of Israel will be laid waste, and I will rise up against the house of Jeroboam with the sword.’
AMO 7:10 Then Amaziah, chief priest of Bethel sent this message to King Jeroboam of Israel: ‘Amos has conspired against you right in the heart of Israel. The country cannot survive all his words.
AMO 7:11 Amos has said, “Jeroboam will die by the sword, and Israel will be led away captive out of their land.”’
AMO 7:12 And Amaziah said to Amos, ‘Leave, you who see visions, go to the land of Judah. Earn your bread there and prophesy there,
AMO 7:13 but don’t prophesy any more at Bethel, for it is the king’s sanctuary, and it is the royal residence.’
AMO 7:14 ‘I am no prophet,’ Amos answered Amaziah, ‘nor trained as one. I am a shepherd and a keeper of sycamores fig trees.
AMO 7:15 But the Lord took me away from following the flock, and the Lord said to me, “Go, prophesy to my people Israel.”
AMO 7:16 Now therefore listen to the Lord’s message: “You say not to prophesy against Israel, nor to preach against the house of Isaac.
AMO 7:17 But the Lord says: Your wife will become a prostitute in the city, your sons and your daughters will fall by the sword, your land will be divided up, you will die on unclean soil, and Israel will be led away captive out of their land.”’
AMO 8:1 The Lord God showed me this: a basket of summer fruit.
AMO 8:2 ‘What do you see, Amos?’ he asked. I replied, ‘A basket of ripe summer fruit.’ Then the Lord said to me: The time is ripe for my people Israel, I will no longer overlook their crimes.
AMO 8:3 The singing women in the palace will howl on that day, says the Lord: Corpses everywhere, thrown out in silence.
AMO 8:4 Listen to this, you who trample on the needy, who oppress the poor of the earth,
AMO 8:5 saying: When will the feast of the new moon be over so that we may sell grain? And the sabbath ended so that we may offer wheat for sale? Reducing the measure and increasing the price, cheating with false scales,
AMO 8:6 mixing the sweepings in with the wheat. Then we can buy the poor for money, the needy for a pair of shoes.
AMO 8:7 Now the Lord has taken an oath by the Pride of Jacob: I will never forget all their deeds!
AMO 8:8 Because of this won’t the land quake, and all its inhabitants mourn? Won’t the whole of it rise like the Nile, churn and subside like the Nile in Egypt?
AMO 8:9 On that day, says the Lord God, I will make the sun set at noon and darken the earth in broad daylight.
AMO 8:10 I will turn your feasts into mourning, all your songs into dirges. I will cause you to dress in sackcloth, every head shaved. I will make you mourn like you have lost your only son, all that happens will end in bitterness.
AMO 8:11 The day is coming, says the Lord God, when I will send hunger in the land. Not a famine of bread or thirst for water, but for hearing the message of the Lord.
AMO 8:12 Then they will wander from sea to sea, from the north to the east, to seek a message from the Lord, but they will not find it.
AMO 8:13 In that day beautiful girls and strong young men will faint from thirst.
AMO 8:14 Those who take oaths by the shameful idol of Samaria, who swear, “As surely as your God lives, O Dan!” and, “By the sacred way to Beer-sheba!” – they will fall and never rise again.
AMO 9:1 I saw the Lord towering above the altar, and he commanded: Strike the tops of the pillars so that the foundations may shake, bring them down on the heads of the people below. The rest of them I will slay with the sword: no one will get away, no one will escape.
AMO 9:2 If they dig down to Sheol, there will my hand take them. If they climb up to the heavens, from there will I bring them down.
AMO 9:3 If they hide themselves on the top of Carmel, there will I search them out and take them. If they hide out of my sight at the bottom of the sea, there will I command the sea serpent to bite them.
AMO 9:4 If they are taken into captivity by their enemies, there will I command the sword to slay them. I will keep my eye on them but for evil and not for good.
AMO 9:5 It is the Lord the God of hosts, who touches the earth and it trembles, all who live on it mourn. The earth rises up like the Nile, and sinks like the Nile of Egypt.
AMO 9:6 The one who builds in the heavens, who sets the dome of the sky over the earth, who summons the waters of the sea and pours them out on the face of the earth: the Lord is his name.
AMO 9:7 To me, Israelites, you are just like the Cushites, says the Lord. Yes, I brought Israel up out of the land of Egypt, but also the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Arameans from Kir!
AMO 9:8 Behold the eyes of the Lord God are on the sinful kingdom: I will destroy it from the face of the earth! But I will not completely destroy the house of Jacob, says the Lord.
AMO 9:9 For behold I am about to give the command, and I will shake the house of Israel among all the nations just as one shakes grain in a sieve, but not a pebble will fall to the ground.
AMO 9:10 All the sinners of my people, who deny that disaster will touch or befall them, will die by the sword.
AMO 9:11 On that day I will raise up the fallen house of David, I will wall up its gaps and raise up its ruins, I will rebuild it as it was long ago.
AMO 9:12 They will possess again the rest of Edom, and all the nations which once you ruled for me, says the Lord, who will do this.
AMO 9:13 Listen! The days are coming, says the Lord, when the harvest is too big to reap before it is time to plough, when the grapes cannot be all trod before it is time to sow, when the mountains will run with sweet wine, and every hill will flow with it.
AMO 9:14 I will bring back my people Israel, they will rebuild waste cities and inhabit them, plant vineyards and drink their wine, make gardens and eat their fruit.
AMO 9:15 I will plant them on their own soil, and they will never again be uprooted from their land which I have given them, says the Lord your God.
OBA 1:1 The vision of Obadiah; what the Lord said about Edom: We have heard a report from the Lord, a messenger has been sent among the nations; Rise up, let us rise against Edom in battle!
OBA 1:2 I will make you small among the nations, and despised by all!
OBA 1:3 Your proud heart has misled you, you who live in the clefts of the rock, you who build on high your dwelling. You say to yourselves, “Who can bring me down to earth?”
OBA 1:4 Though you build high as the eagle, though between the stars you set your nest, from there will I bring you down, says the Lord.
OBA 1:5 If thieves had come to you, marauders by night would they not have stolen only as much as they needed? If grape-gatherers had come to you would they not have left some gleanings?
OBA 1:6 Descendents of Esau, all your treasures are looted.
OBA 1:7 To your border they have driven you, all your allies have betrayed you. Your avowed friends have overpowered you, they have set a trap for you. Where is your wisdom now?
OBA 1:8 The Lord says: On that day, I will destroy the wise of Edom, drive wisdom out of Mount Esau.
OBA 1:9 Your warriors will be filled with terror, Teman, none will be left alive on Mount Esau.
OBA 1:10 Because of the violence done to your relatives, the people of Jacob, shame covers you, you are cut off forever.
OBA 1:11 In the day when you stood aloof, in the day when strangers carried away their wealth, and strangers entered into their gates, and over Jerusalem cast lots, you were as one of those strangers.
OBA 1:12 You should not have gloated over your relatives, in the day of their misfortune. You should not have exulted over the land of Judah in the day of their destruction. You should not have laughed loudly at their distress.
OBA 1:13 You should not have entered in at the gate of my people in the day of their disaster. You should not have gloated over their calamity, in the day of their disaster, nor stretched out your hand after their wealth in the day of their disaster,
OBA 1:14 nor stood at the crossroads to cut down their fugitives, nor should you have betrayed their refugees in the day of distress.
OBA 1:15 Near at hand is the Lord’s day for all the nations. As you have done so will it be done to you. Your deeds will come back on your own head.
OBA 1:16 As you have drunk upon my holy mountain, so all the nations will drink in turn; They will drink deep and be as though they had not been.
OBA 1:17 But on Mount Zion some will escape, it will be again holy, and those of the house of Jacob will again enter into their possessions.
OBA 1:18 For the house of Jacob will be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, but the house of Esau will become stubble. They will kindle and devour it. Not even one of the house of Esau will escape, for the Lord has spoken.
OBA 1:19 They will possess the Negeb and Mount Esau, and the Shephelah of the Philistines. They will possess the territory of Ephraim and Samaria, and Benjamin will possess Gilead.
OBA 1:20 The exiles of Israel will possess the land of the Canaanites as far as Zarephath. The captives of Jerusalem who are in Sepharad will possess the cities of the Negreb.
OBA 1:21 The rescued will come up on Mount Zion to rule Mount Esau, and the kingdom will belong to the Lord.
JON 1:1 This message from the Lord came to Jonah, the son of Amittai:
JON 1:2 ‘Arise, go to that great city, Nineveh, and preach against it; for their wickedness is known to me.’
JON 1:3 But Jonah started to flee to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord. He went down to Joppa and found a ship going to Tarshish. So he paid the fare and went aboard to go with them to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord.
JON 1:4 But the Lord made a furious wind blow over the sea, and there was such a great storm that the ship was in danger of breaking to pieces.
JON 1:5 The sailors were terrified and each cried for help to his own god. They threw the ship’s cargo into the sea to make the ship lighter. Meanwhile Jonah had gone down into the bottom of the ship and lay fast asleep.
JON 1:6 The captain of the ship went and said to him, ‘How can you sleep? Call on your god; perhaps that god will think of us, so that we may not be lost.’
JON 1:7 The sailors said to one another, ‘Come, let us cast lots to discover on whose account this evil has come upon us.’ So they cast lots, and the lot indicated Jonah.
JON 1:8 So they said to him, ‘Are you to blame for this? Tell us, what is your business, and where do you come from? What is your country and to what people do you belong?’
JON 1:9 He replied, ‘I am a Hebrew, and a worshipper of the Lord, the God of heaven, who made the sea and the dry land.’
JON 1:10 Then the men were greatly frightened and said to him, ‘What have you done?’ For they knew that he was fleeing from the presence of the Lord, because he had told them.
JON 1:11 Then they said to him, ‘What should we do to you, to make the sea calm for us?’ For the sea grew more and more stormy.
JON 1:12 He said to them, ‘Take me up and throw me into the sea, and the sea will be calm for you, for I know that it is because of me this fierce storm has overtaken you.’
JON 1:13 But instead the men rowed hard to get back to the land; they could not, however, for the sea grew more and more stormy ahead.
JON 1:14 So they cried to the Lord and said, ‘We beg you, Lord, we beg you, don’t let us die for this man’s life, and don’t let us be guilty of shedding innocent blood, for you are the Lord; you have done as it pleases you.’
JON 1:15 And they took up Jonah, and threw him into the sea; and the sea became calm.
JON 1:16 Then the men greatly feared the Lord, and they offered a sacrifice and made vows to him.
JON 1:17 But the Lord arranged for a great fish to swallow Jonah, and Jonah was inside the fish three days and three nights.
JON 2:1 Jonah prayed to the Lord his God, out of the belly of the fish,
JON 2:2 and said: I cried out of my distress, to the Lord and he answered me; out of the midst of Sheol I cried aloud, and you heard my voice.
JON 2:3 For you cast me into the deep, into heart of the seas, and the great flood rolled about me; all your breakers and your waves passed over me.
JON 2:4 Then I said, I am driven out, away from your sight; How will I ever again look towards your holy temple?
JON 2:5 The waters surrounded me, the great deep engulfed me, the sea weeds were wrapped about my head.
JON 2:6 I went down to the roots of the mountains; the prison of the earth closed over me forever. Yet you brought up my life from destruction, O Lord my God.
JON 2:7 As my life slipped away, I remembered the Lord; and my prayer reached you, in your holy temple.
JON 2:8 Those who worship worthless idols abandon their own mercy,
JON 2:9 but I will sacrifice to you with loud thanksgiving! I will pay that which I have vowed. Salvation is the Lord’s.
JON 2:10 And the Lord spoke to the fish, and it threw up Jonah upon the dry land.
JON 3:1 This message from the Lord came to Jonah the second time,
JON 3:2 ‘Arise, go to that great city, Nineveh, and proclaim to it the message that I tell you.’
JON 3:3 So Jonah started for Nineveh, as the Lord commanded. Now Nineveh was so large a city that it took three days’ journey to cross it.
JON 3:4 Jonah began by going a day’s journey into the city, and he proclaimed, ‘Forty days more and Nineveh will be overthrown.’
JON 3:5 And the people of Nineveh believed God; and they ordered a fast and put on sackcloth, from the greatest to the least of them.
JON 3:6 And when word came to the king of Nineveh, he rose from his throne, took off his robe, dressed in sackcloth, and sat in ashes.
JON 3:7 And he made this proclamation and published it in Nineveh: ‘By the decree of the king and his nobles: People, beast, herd, and flock must not taste anything; let them not eat nor drink water.
JON 3:8 Let both people and animals put on sackcloth and let them cry earnestly to God; let them each turn from their evil ways and from the deeds of violence which they are doing.
JON 3:9 Who knows? God may relent and avert his fierce anger, so that we may not die.’
JON 3:10 When God saw that they turned from their evil course, he relented the evil which he said he would do to them, and did not do it.
JON 4:1 But this seemed very wrong to Jonah and he became angry.
JON 4:2 He prayed to the Lord and said, ‘Ah, Lord, wasn’t this what I said when I was still in my own country? That was why I fled at once to Tarshish; for I knew that you are a gracious and merciful God, patient, and loving and ready to forgive.
JON 4:3 Therefore, Lord, I beg you, take my life from me; for it is better for me to die than to live!’
JON 4:4 But the Lord said, ‘Are you doing right in being angry?’
JON 4:5 Then Jonah went out of the city and sat down on the east side, and there made a hut for himself and sat under it, waiting to see what would become of the city.
JON 4:6 And the Lord arranged for a bush to grow up over Jonah as a shade for his head to make him comfortable. The bush gave Jonah great pleasure;
JON 4:7 but at dawn the next day God arranged for a worm which attacked the bush, so that it wilted.
JON 4:8 And when the sun rose, God arranged a hot east wind. And the sun beat upon Jonah’s head, so that he was faint and begged that he might die, saying, ‘It is better for me to die than to live.’
JON 4:9 But God said to Jonah, ‘Are you doing right in being angry about the bush?’ He replied, ‘I have every right to be as angry as I could possibly be!’
JON 4:10 The Lord said, ‘You care about a bush which has cost you no trouble and which you have not made grow, which came up in a night and wilted in a night.
JON 4:11 Should I not care for the great city Nineveh, in which there are one hundred and twenty thousand people who do not know their right hand from their left; and many cattle too?’
MIC 1:1 The Lord’s message which came to Micah of Morsheth in the reigns of Jotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. The visions he saw about Samaria and Jerusalem.
MIC 1:2 Listen, all you peoples! Pay attention, all you inhabitants of the earth! For the Lord God will be a witness against you, the Lord from his holy temple!
MIC 1:3 The Lord is coming from his holy place, he descends and treads on the heights of the earth,
MIC 1:4 so that the mountains melt beneath like wax in the presence of the fire, and the valleys break apart like water poured down a steep descent.
MIC 1:5 All this is because of the crime of Jacob, and for the sin of the house of Israel. What was the crime of Jacob? Was it not Samaria? What is the sin of Judah? Is it not Jerusalem?
MIC 1:6 ‘I will make Samaria a ruin in an open field, and a place where a vineyard is planted, I will hurl down her stones into the valley, and lay bare her foundations.
MIC 1:7 ‘All her images will be shattered, and all her statues will be burned with fire, and all her idols I will lay in ruins. For they were acquired by prostitution, and to prostitution they will return.’
MIC 1:8 This is why I will mourn and wail, I will go barefoot and naked, I will howl like the jackals and mourn like the desert owl.
MIC 1:9 For the blow that Samaria has received is incurable. It has spread over Judah, it extends even to the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.
MIC 1:10 Don’t tell this in Gath! Don’t even cry – but sit in the dust at Beth-leaphrah.
MIC 1:11 Pass by, inhabitants of Shaphir, naked and ashamed! The inhabitants of Zaanan cannot leave their city. Beth-ezel laments and removes its support from you.
MIC 1:12 The inhabitants of Maroth wait anxiously for good! But the Lord has sent disaster to the gates of Jerusalem.
MIC 1:13 Harness the horse to the chariot, inhabitants of Lachish. You led the daughter of Zion, Jerusalem, into sin, in you are found the crimes of Israel.
MIC 1:14 Therefore you must give parting gifts to Moresheth-gath. Beth-achzib will betray the kings of Israel.
MIC 1:15 I will hand you to a conqueror, people of Mareshah, the leaders of Israel will hide in Adullam Cave!
MIC 1:16 Shave your head in mourning for the children you love, until you are bald as vultures, because they have left you for exile.
MIC 2:1 Woe to those who lie awake planning evil, who in the light of morning carry out their plan because they have the power to do it.
MIC 2:2 They covet fields and seize them, desire houses and take them, they crush householder and his household, people and their possessions.
MIC 2:3 Therefore the Lord says: ‘I am planning disaster from which you cannot save your neck, nor walk proudly because it will be a terrible time.
MIC 2:4 On that day they will sing a taunt-song to you, this mocking lament: “My people’s estate is being measured for sale, our captors are dividing our fields. We are completely undone.”
MIC 2:5 There will be no one to measure out land for you from the Lord’s community.
MIC 2:6 ‘“Don’t rant!” they urge, “Of such things one does not prophesy! Shame will not overtake us!
MIC 2:7 Is the Lord impatient, or are such things his deeds? Are not his words favourable to the family of Jacob?” Aren’t my commands good for those who obey them?
MIC 2:8 But you, you stand up as a foe against those who are peaceful; you strip the robe from those who pass by quietly, averse to conflict.
MIC 2:9 Women of my people you drive out from their happy homes, from their young children you take away my glory forever.
MIC 2:10 Rise and begone, for this is no place to rest. Your uncleanness brings destruction, severe destruction.
MIC 2:11 If a person walking in wine and falsehood were to say, “I will prophesy to you of wine and strong drink,” then he would be the perfect prophet for this people!’
MIC 2:12 ‘I will assuredly assemble all of Jacob, I will surely gather the survivors of Israel. I will herd them together as sheep in a fold, like a flock in the pasture, and the land will resound with the sounds of multitudes.
MIC 2:13 ‘The one who breaks out goes first. They have broken forth and passed by the gate and through it have they gone out. Their king leads before them, the Lord at their head.’
MIC 3:1 I also said: ‘Listen now, leaders of Jacob, judges of the house of Israel. Is it not your duty to know what is the right?
MIC 3:2 Haters of that which is good and lovers of evil!
MIC 3:3 ‘They devour the flesh of my people, and their hide they strip from off them, and break in pieces and serve up their bones, like meat in a pot or the cooking pan!
MIC 3:4 ‘Then they will cry out to the Lord, but he will not pay attention to them. He will hide his face from them at that time because they have committed such crimes.’
MIC 3:5 Therefore the Lord says: ‘To the prophets who lead my people astray, who when they have food between their teeth declare peace, but against one who puts nothing in their mouths, they proclaim an open war!
MIC 3:6 ‘Night will overtake you so that you have no vision, and darkness so that there will be no divination, and the sun will go down on the prophets, and the day will be dark over them.
MIC 3:7 ‘The seers will be ashamed, and the diviners will turn pale, all of them will cover their mouths. For there will be no answer from God.
MIC 3:8 ‘But I, on the contrary am full of power, and the sense of justice and strength, to make known to Jacob his crime, and to Israel his sin.
MIC 3:9 ‘Hear this, leaders of the house of Jacob, judges of the house of Israel, you who spurn justice, and make all that is straight crooked,
MIC 3:10 who build Zion with acts of bloodshed, and Jerusalem with crime.
MIC 3:11 ‘The leaders render judgment for a bribe, and her priests give oracles for a reward, and her prophets divine for silver. Yet they claim to rely on the Lord, “The Lord”, they say, “is in our midst. Evil cannot overtake us.”
MIC 3:12 ‘Therefore for your sakes Zion will be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem will become a heap of ruins, and the temple mount a wooded height.’
MIC 4:1 In the days to come the mountain of the Lord will be established, the house of our God on the top of the mountain, lifted above the hills. All the nations will flow to it,
MIC 4:2 and many peoples will go and say, ‘Come, let us go up to the Lord’s mount, to the house of the God of Jacob, so that he may instruct us in his ways, so that we may walk in his paths.’ For from Zion proceeds instruction and the Lord’s word from Jerusalem.
MIC 4:3 He will arbitrate between many peoples, and render decisions for numerous nations, They will beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, they will learn war no more.
MIC 4:4 They will live each under his vine, and under his fig tree, with none to terrify them. For the mouth of the Lord of hosts has spoken.
MIC 4:5 Each nation trusts in the names of their gods, but we will worship the Lord our God forever.
MIC 4:6 ‘On that day,’ says the Lord, ‘I will assemble the lame. I will gather exiles I punished.
MIC 4:7 I will restore the lame as a remnant, the exiles into a great nation. The Lord will rule over them on Mount Zion from that time forever.’
MIC 4:8 But you, watchtower for the flock, hill of the daughter of Zion, to you will return your former rule.
MIC 4:9 So why do you now cry aloud? Haven’t you any king? Or has your counsellor perished, so you writhe in pain like a woman in labour?
MIC 4:10 Writhe and scream, daughter of Zion, like a woman in labour! For now you must leave the city and camp in the open field. You will be taken to Babylon, but there will be rescued. There the Lord will save you from the hands of your foes.
MIC 4:11 But now many nations gather against you. They say, ‘Let her be defiled, we will gloat over Zion.’
MIC 4:12 But they do not know the thoughts of the Lord. They do not understand his plan, for he has gathered them like sheaves for the threshing floor.
MIC 4:13 ‘Arise, thresh, daughter of Zion. I will make your horns iron, and your hoofs brass, so you might beat in pieces many peoples, and devote to the Lord their spoil, and their wealth to the ruler of all the earth.
MIC 5:1 ‘Now cut yourself in bitter grief, daughter besieged by soldiers. They have set a wall around you. They strike the ruler of Israel, in the face with a rod.
MIC 5:2 ‘Bethlehem in Ephrathah, small among the tribes of Judah, from you will come a king who will rule for me over Israel, whose family line goes back to the distant past.’
MIC 5:3 So the Lord will only abandon Israel to its enemies until the woman in labour gives birth. Then the survivors will be reunited with their own people.
MIC 5:4 And he will stand and shepherd by the strength of the Lord, In the exalted name of the Lord his God; And they will live in security, for now he will be great, even to the ends of the earth.
MIC 5:5 This will be our peace: when Assyria comes into our land and treads on our soil, we will raise up against him seven shepherds, eight leaders of men.
MIC 5:6 They will shepherd Assyria with a sword, and the land of Nimrod with bared blades. They will deliver us from Assyria, when they come into our land, and tread within our borders.
MIC 5:7 And the survivors of Jacob will be disbursed among the nations, in the midst of many peoples, like dew from the Lord, like showers on the grass, which don’t wait for people to come or linger for mortals.
MIC 5:8 And the survivors of Jacob will be disbursed among the nations, in the midst of many peoples, like a lion among the beasts of the forest, like a young lion among the sheep-folds, who, when he passes through, pounces. He savages his prey. There is no rescuer.
MIC 5:9 Let your hand triumph over your adversaries, let all your enemies be cut off.
MIC 5:10 On that day, says the Lord: ‘I will slaughter your horses from your midst, and destroy your chariots.
MIC 5:11 I will devastate the cities in your land, and tear down your fortresses.
MIC 5:12 I will destroy your magic charms, and you will have no soothsayers.
MIC 5:13 I will cut down your idols and sacred pillars, and you will not worship any more the work of your hands.
MIC 5:14 I will uproot your sacred poles, and destroy your idols.
MIC 5:15 In my wrath and my anger I will seek vengeance on the nations that ignore me.’
MIC 6:1 Hear now what the Lord is saying: Arise, present your complaint before the mountains, let the hills hear your voice!
MIC 6:2 Hear, mountains, the Lord’s accusation, listen, foundations of the earth. For the Lord has a case against his people. He has a dispute with Israel.
MIC 6:3 ‘My people, what have I done to you? How have I displeased you? Answer me!
MIC 6:4 For I brought you up from the land of Egypt, from the land of slavery I redeemed you. I sent Moses, Aaron, and Miriam to lead you.
MIC 6:5 My people, what did Balak, king of Moab counsel? And how did Balaam, the son of Beor, answer him? Remember now the journey from Shittim to Gilgal, so that you might realise the just deeds of the Lord.’
MIC 6:6 With what should I come before the Lord? Bow myself before the God on high? Should I come before him with burnt-offerings, with calves a year old?
MIC 6:7 Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, With ten thousand streams of oil? Should I give him my firstborn son for my guilt, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
MIC 6:8 The Lord has told you what is good, what he demands of you: Only to do justice and love mercy, and to walk humbly with your God.
MIC 6:9 Listen! The Lord calls to the city! Listen, tribe and assembly of the city!
MIC 6:10 ‘Can I forget the hoarded treasures in the houses of the wicked, and the accursed scant measure?
MIC 6:11 Can I leave her unpunished because of evil scales, and the bag of false weights?
MIC 6:12 Whose rich people are full of violence, her inhabitants liars, whose tongues speak deceit?
MIC 6:13 ‘But I indeed, have begun to punish you, to lay you in ruins because of your sins.
MIC 6:14 You will eat but not be satisfied, your stomach empty within you. You will store up but lose everything, because whatever you save I will give to the sword.
MIC 6:15 You will sow but not reap. You will tread the olives but have no oil for rubbing, tread grapes but drink no wine!
MIC 6:16 ‘For you have followed the commands of Omri, and all the practices of the house of Ahab. You have acted in accord with their counsels, so I will give you up to ruin, the city’s inhabitants to derision. The nations will treat you with contempt!’
MIC 7:1 Woe, woe is me, for I have become like a field after harvest, like a vineyard after gathering; not a cluster of grapes to eat, not a fig that anyone desires.
MIC 7:2 The honest have perished from the land, of the upright among people there is none. All of them lie in wait to shed blood. They hunt one another with the net.
MIC 7:3 Their hands know well how to do evil, the officer and judge demands a bribe, the high official decides as he pleases and they conspire to pervert justice.
MIC 7:4 The best of them are like a thorn thicket, their most upright like a prickly hedge. The day of their punishment has come, now will be their confusion!
MIC 7:5 Do not trust your neighbour, do not rely on a friend. From the wife who lies in your arms guard your tongue.
MIC 7:6 For son insults father, daughter rises up against mother, daughter-in-law against mother-in-law, a man’s enemies are the people of his own household.
MIC 7:7 But I will look to the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation. My God will hear me!
MIC 7:8 Do not rejoice over me, my enemy. If I have fallen, I will rise. If I sit in darkness, the Lord is my light.
MIC 7:9 The anger of the Lord I will bear, for against him have I sinned – until he champions my cause and gives judgment for me. He will bring me into to the light, I will see his justice.
MIC 7:10 So my enemy will see, and shame will cover them, they who said, ‘Where is the Lord your God?’ I will look upon them, they will be trampled on like mud in the street!
MIC 7:11 It is a day for rebuilding your walls, this day will your boundary will be extended.
MIC 7:12 This day they will come to you, from Assyria and the cities of Egypt, and from Egypt even to the Euphrates River, from sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain.
MIC 7:13 Though the land has become a desolation because of its inhabitants, because of their deeds.
MIC 7:14 Shepherd your flock with your staff, the flock that belong to you, who live alone in the forest, in the midst of meadows; so that they may pasture in Bashon and Gilead as in the days of old,
MIC 7:15 as in the days when you came from Egypt, gave us wonders to see.
MIC 7:16 Nations will see and be ashamed of all their might; they will put their hands to their mouth, their ears will become deaf,
MIC 7:17 they will lick the dust like snakes, like creatures that crawl on the earth; they will come trembling and in terror from their hiding places, in dread and fear.
MIC 7:18 Who is a God like you, forgiving iniquity and passing by the rebellion of the remnant of your people? He does not retain his anger forever, but is one who delights in mercy.
MIC 7:19 He will tread under foot our iniquity; you will cast into the depths of the sea all our iniquities.
MIC 7:20 You will show faithfulness to Jacob, and loving kindness to Abraham, as you have sworn to our ancestors from the days of old.
NAH 1:1 A message about Nineveh, a vision which came to Nahum from Elkosh.
NAH 1:2 The Lord tolerates no rivals. The Lord is vengeful and fierce in wrath. The Lord does not fail to punish his foes; the Lord is vengeful against his enemies.
NAH 1:3 The Lord is slow to anger, great in power. The guilty will not escape his punishment. Storm tempest is his path and cloud is the dust of his feet.
NAH 1:4 He rebukes the sea and dries it up and makes all the streams run dry. Bashan and Carmel are languishing and the bloom of Lebanon is withered.
NAH 1:5 The mountains tremble before him and the hills dissolve. The earth heaves before him, the world and all who live in it.
NAH 1:6 Who can stand before his wrath? Who can withstand the heat of his anger? His fierce fury pours forth like fire, he shatters rocks.
NAH 1:7 The Lord is good to those who hope in him, a place of refuge in the day of trouble.
NAH 1:8 With rushing flood an end he makes of those who rise against him, he drives his enemies into darkness.
NAH 1:9 Why do you plot against the Lord? He will end you. He only takes vengeance once.
NAH 1:10 Thorns, tangled and drenched, they are consumed like dry stubble.
NAH 1:11 Nineveh! From you has arisen one who plots evil against the Lord, a counsellor of wickedness.
NAH 1:12 The Lord says: ‘Though they are many and strong, they will pass away and be gone. Though I have afflicted you, I will afflict you no more,
NAH 1:13 and now I will break his yoke from your necks and snap your chains.’
NAH 1:14 The Lord has given this command concerning you, Nineveh: ‘Your name will no longer be remembered. I will destroy every idol and image in the house of your God. I will destroy even your tomb, for you are worthless.’
NAH 1:15 Look! On the mountains a messenger bringing good news, announcing peace! ‘Celebrate the feasts, Judah, fulfil your vows. Never again will these enemies invade your land, they are destroyed!’
NAH 2:1 Nineveh! The destroyer has come up against you; mount guard upon the rampart; watch the road; brace yourselves; strengthen your might to the utmost.
NAH 2:2 For the Lord is restoring the majesty of Jacob and of Israel, though the devastators have plundered them and destroyed their vines.
NAH 2:3 The shields of his warriors are dyed red, his soldiers are clothed in scarlet, his chariots gleam like fire on the day he prepares for battle spears are shaken.
NAH 2:4 Chariots rush across the fields, storm through the squares; they flame like torches, they dart like lightening.
NAH 2:5 A leader rallies his nobles, they hurl themselves forward. They speed on toward the wall; the storming-shield is set up.
NAH 2:6 The water-gates are thrown open, and the palace dissolves in ruins.
NAH 2:7 The queen is stripped, she is carried off. Her maids moan like doves, beating upon their breasts.
NAH 2:8 Like a pool of water is Nineveh, her waters fast ebbing away. ‘Stand firm! Stand firm!’ someone cries, but no one turns back.
NAH 2:9 ‘Loot the silver, loot the gold, for there is no end to the treasure, the wealth and precious things.’
NAH 2:10 Nineveh is empty, desolate, devastated, with faint heart and knocking knee. There is weakness in every limb, and faces grow pale.
NAH 2:11 Where now is the den of lions? Where now the lair of their young? Where the lion used to withdraw, with his cubs, with none to disturb them?
NAH 2:12 The lion tore enough for his cubs, and strangled prey for his lionesses. He filled his caves with the kill, he filled his lairs with fresh meat.
NAH 2:13 ‘But see, I am against you,’ the Lord of hosts declares, ‘I will burn your chariots in smoke and fire. The sword will devour your young lions. You will never again prey on the land. No more will your messengers be heard.’
NAH 3:1 Woe to the bloody city! Full of lies and plunder, without end is the spoil.
NAH 3:2 Hear the crack of the whip, hear the rattle of wheels. Galloping horses, jolting chariots.
NAH 3:3 Horsemen charging, swords flashing, spears glittering, a multitude of slain, a heap of bodies, no end to the corpses over which people stumble!
NAH 3:4 ‘Because you acted like a whore, bewitching the nations, enticing the peoples,
NAH 3:5 I am against you, Nineveh’ the Lord of hosts declares. ‘I will strip your clothes and show the nations your nakedness, and the kingdoms your shame.
NAH 3:6 ‘I will fling loathsome filth at you, and make you an object of contempt, a spectacle,
NAH 3:7 so that everyone who sees you will flee from you and say: “Nineveh is laid waste, who will mourn for her?”
NAH 3:8 ‘Are you any better than Thebes, which stood on the banks of the Nile, with waters around as a rampart, whose wall was the sea of waters?
NAH 3:9 Her strength was Ethiopia and Egypt. The Libyans were her helpers, and Put with its countless people.
NAH 3:10 Yet she was exiled and made captive. On all corners of the streets her infants were dashed to pieces. Lots were cast for her nobles, all her great ones were bound in chains.
NAH 3:11 ‘You too, Nineveh, will be drunk with fear; you too will seek a place of escape from the foe.
NAH 3:12 All your fortresses are fig trees with the first ripe figs; if shaken, they fall into the mouth of the eater!
NAH 3:13 Your troops are weak as women before your foes; the gates of your land are wide open; your defenses burned down.
NAH 3:14 ‘Draw water for the siege, strengthen your forts. Go to the clay pits and tread the clay; take up the brick moulds.
NAH 3:15 There the fire will consume you, the sword will cut you down. Multiply like the locust or a swarm of grasshoppers.
NAH 3:16 Increase the numbers of your merchants until they are more than the stars of heaven,
NAH 3:17 until your watchmen are locusts, and your scribes like grasshoppers, which swarm in the hedges on a cold day; but when the sun rises they fly away, no one knows where.
NAH 3:18 ‘King of Assyria: your princes slumber, your nobles sleep! Your people are scattered on the mountains with no one to gather them!
NAH 3:19 There is no healing for your hurt, your wound is incurable. All who hear of your fate clap their hands in joy, for who has escaped your limitless cruelty?’
HAB 1:1 The message seen by the prophet Habakkuk.
HAB 1:2 How long, Lord, have I cried out and without you hearing me! I cry to you, ‘Violence!’ but you do not help.
HAB 1:3 Why do you make me look upon wickedness and behold trouble? Destruction and violence are before my eyes, and fighting and quarrelling.
HAB 1:4 Therefore the law is weak, and justice is never rendered; for the wicked surround the righteous, so that justice is perverted.
HAB 1:5 Look at the nations, look well, be shocked and amazed. For I am about to do a work in your days; you will not believe it when it is told.
HAB 1:6 For I am about to raise up the Chaldeans, a nation grim and quick of action who sweep over the whole breadth of the earth to seize dwellings not their own.
HAB 1:7 They bring fear and terror. They write their own rules.
HAB 1:8 Their horses are swifter than leopards, quicker than wolves hunting at dusk. From afar they come swooping down, like an eagle attacking its prey.
HAB 1:9 They all come to do violence, a horde like a desert wind, they gather up captives like sand.
HAB 1:10 At kings they scoff, and princes are sport to them. They laugh at every fortress, and heap up earth to take it.
HAB 1:11 Then they sweep on like the wind, Their strength is their god.
HAB 1:12 Are you not eternal, Lord, my holy one, who does not die? Lord you have appointed them to execute judgment, my rock, you have established them to punish.
HAB 1:13 Your eyes are too pure to look at evil, you cannot condone iniquity. So why do you regard the treacherous in silence, while the wicked swallows the upright?
HAB 1:14 You have made people like the fish of the sea, like reptiles that have no ruler.
HAB 1:15 The wicked sweep them all into their nets, and gather them into their drag-nets, and rejoice and celebrate.
HAB 1:16 Therefore they sacrifice to their net, and burn offerings to their drag-net; for by their nets are their portions generous, and their food is rich.
HAB 1:17 Will they empty their nets continually, slaughter nations unpityingly?
HAB 2:1 I will take my stand on my watch-tower, and station myself on a turret. I will watch to see what the Lord will say to me, what answer he will make to my complaint.
HAB 2:2 Then the Lord answered me and said: Inscribe the vision plainly on tablets, so that even someone running by could read it.
HAB 2:3 Though the vision waits for the time set, it hastens to fulfilment and will not fail; Though it linger long, wait for it. For it surely will come and will not be delayed.
HAB 2:4 The strength of the proud fails, but the upright lives by their faithfulness.
HAB 2:5 Wealth is treacherous, the arrogant never have enough. They make their desire as wide as Sheol, are like death, unsatisfied, For they gather to themselves all the nations, bring together to themselves all peoples.
HAB 2:6 Shouldn’t everyone mock them? sing a taunt-song against them, and say: Woe to the person who amasses what is not theirs, and loads them self down with goods taken in pledge!
HAB 2:7 Won’t your creditors suddenly rise, and those who will overthrow you awake, and you become their prey?
HAB 2:8 For as you have plundered many peoples, the survivors will prey upon you. You have shed blood and committed violence to the earth, peoples and their cities.
HAB 2:9 Woe to you who seeks unjust gain for your dynasty, who sets your nest on high to be safe from the reach of misfortune!
HAB 2:10 You have planned only shame for your dynasty. You have destroyed many peoples, and brought guilt upon yourself;
HAB 2:11 the stone will cry out from the wall, and the beam from the timber will answer it.
HAB 2:12 Woe to the person who builds a city by bloodshed, and founds a town by crime
HAB 2:13 while the peoples toil for what fires will consume, and the nations weary themselves for nothing! This the Lord of hosts has said,
HAB 2:14 and the earth will be as full of the knowledge of the glory of the Lord as the seas are full of water.
HAB 2:15 Woe to him who in fury gives drink to his neighbor to make him drunk, and see him naked.
HAB 2:16 You are filled with shame, not glory; drink yourself and be uncovered. The cup from the Lord’s hand will pass in turn to you, and shame will cover your glory!
HAB 2:17 For the violence done to Lebanon will overwhelm you, the destruction of animals will terrify you, because you shed people’s blood on the earth, destroyed people and their cities.
HAB 2:18 What use is an idol? A human made it, a metal image. It cannot speak, it cannot teach truth, Why does its maker trust it?
HAB 2:19 Woe to the person who says to a block, awake! to a dumb stone, arise! What can it teach? It may be set with gold and silver, but there is no breath at all within it.
HAB 2:20 The Lord is in his holy temple. Let all the earth be silent before him!
HAB 3:1 A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet, according to the Shigionoth.
HAB 3:2 I have heard, Lord, of your fame, I have seen, Lord, your work; through the years you have make yourself known, in wrath you remember mercy.
HAB 3:3 God comes from Teman, and the Holy One from the mountain-land of Paran. Selah His glory covers the heavens, and his splendour fills the earth.
HAB 3:4 Before him it is like the light, rays he has at his side, where his power is hidden.
HAB 3:5 Before him pestilence stalks, after him plague follows.
HAB 3:6 He stands, and the earth trembles, he looks, and the nations melt away, and the mountains of old are scattered, the everlasting hills bow down. These are his ways from of old.
HAB 3:7 The tents of Cushan are afraid, the curtains of Midian tremble.
HAB 3:8 Is your wrath, Lord, with the rivers? Is your anger against the streams? Or your rage against the sea? Is that why you ride on your war-steeds? Why you mount your chariots of victory?
HAB 3:9 Why you bare your bow? Why you fill your quiver with shafts? You split the earth with torrents.
HAB 3:10 The mountains see you and writhe. The tempest of waters sweeps by. The great deep sends forth its voice, and lifts up its hands.
HAB 3:11 The sun forgets to rise. The moon stands still in its place. Your arrows go forth to give light. Your glittering spear is as lightning.
HAB 3:12 In rage you stride over the earth. In wrath you trample the nations.
HAB 3:13 You go forth to save your people. You go to help your anointed. You crush the head of the wicked nation, laying him bare from thigh to neck. Selah
HAB 3:14 You pierced his head with his spears, as his champions storm out to scatter us, as they rejoice to devour the poor secretly.
HAB 3:15 You tread the sea with your horses, while the mighty waters roar.
HAB 3:16 I hear, and my body trembles, and at the sound my lips quiver. My bones begin to decay, and my footsteps totter beneath me, while I long for the day of distress to come upon those who attack us.
HAB 3:17 Though the fig tree bears no fruit, and there are no grapes on the vines, though the olive harvest fails, and the fields produce no food, though the flock is cut off from the fold, and there is no herd in the stalls,
HAB 3:18 yet I will exult in the Lord, and rejoice in the God who saves me.
HAB 3:19 The Lord God is my strength; he makes my feet as sure as the feet of deer, and causes me to walk on the heights! To the music director: Use stringed instruments.
ZEP 1:1 The Lord’s message, which came to Zephaniah, son of Cushi, son of Gedaliah, son of Amariah, son of Hezekiah, in the time of Josiah of Judah who was son of Amon.
ZEP 1:2 I will utterly destroy everything from off the face of the earth, says the Lord.
ZEP 1:3 I will sweep away human and animal, the birds of the sky and the fish of the sea. I will cause the wicked to stumble, and I will cut off humanity from the face of the earth, says the Lord.
ZEP 1:4 I will stretch out my hand over Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and I will cut off from this place the last remnant of Baal and the name of the heathen priests,
ZEP 1:5 and those who worship on the housetops to the stars in the sky, and those worshippers of the Lord who also pay homage to Milcom,
ZEP 1:6 and those who turn back from following the Lord, And those who do not seek the Lord nor strive to find him.
ZEP 1:7 Be silent before the Lord God, for near is the day of the Lord, for the Lord has prepared a sacrifice, he has sanctified his guests.
ZEP 1:8 On the day of the Lord’s sacrifice: I will punish the officers and the royal princes, and all those who clothe themselves in foreign apparel.
ZEP 1:9 On that day: I will punish all who leap over the threshold, who fill the house of their lord with violence and deceit.
ZEP 1:10 Listen on that day, says the Lord: A cry will be heard from the Fish Gate, and a wailing from the New Quarter, and a great din from the hills.
ZEP 1:11 Those who live in the Mortar wail, for all the traders are silenced, the money counters wiped out.
ZEP 1:12 I will search Jerusalem with a lamp, I will punish those who are at ease, who sit comfortably with their wine, who say to themselves, ‘the Lord brings neither prosperity nor calamity.’
ZEP 1:13 Their wealth will become a prey and their houses a desolation. Though they build houses, they will not inhabit them; though they plant vineyards, they will not drink wine from them.
ZEP 1:14 Near is the day of the Lord! Near and rapidly approaching! Near is the bitter day of the Lord, and the scream of the warrior.
ZEP 1:15 That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of destruction and desolation, a day of darkness and gloom, a day of clouds and thick darkness,
ZEP 1:16 a day of the trumpet and battle-cry, against the fortified cities and against the high battlements.
ZEP 1:17 And I will bring distress upon the people and they will walk as the blind, because they have sinned against the Lord, and their blood will be poured out as dust and their flesh as dung.
ZEP 1:18 Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to save them. For in the day of the wrath of the Lord and in the fire of his fury the whole earth will be consumed. For he will make a speedy end of all the inhabitants of the earth.
ZEP 2:1 Be ashamed within yourselves, be ashamed,
ZEP 2:2 before you become as the drifting chaff, before the anger of the Lord comes upon you, before the day of the Lord’s wrath comes upon you.
ZEP 2:3 Seek the Lord all you meek of the earth, you who obey his law; Seek righteousness, seek meekness; perhaps you may be hidden in the day of the Lord’s wrath.
ZEP 2:4 For Gaza will be forsaken; Ashkelon a desolation; Ashdod – by noon will they rout her and Ekron be torn up!
ZEP 2:5 Woe to those who live by the sea coast, people of the Cherethites! The word of the Lord is against you, Canaan, land of the Philistines! I will destroy you so that you will be without inhabitants,
ZEP 2:6 and you will become shepherds’ cots and folds for flocks.
ZEP 2:7 The sea coast will belong to the survivors of the house of Judah. They will pasture their flocks there. In the house of Ashkelon they will lie down at evening. The Lord their God will be with them and restore their fortunes.
ZEP 2:8 I have heard the taunts of Moab, and the revilings of the Ammonites, how they have taunted my people, and spoken boastfully concerning their border.
ZEP 2:9 Therefore as I live, says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: Moab will be like Sodom, and the Ammonites like Gomorrah, a pile of nettles and saltpits, and a desolation, forever. The residue of my people will plunder them, and the survivors of my nation will inherit them.
ZEP 2:10 This will they have for their pride, because they have taunted and spoken boastfully against the people of the Lord of hosts.
ZEP 2:11 The Lord will terrify them; he will reduce all the gods of the earth; then all the peoples of the nations will worship him, each in their own land.
ZEP 2:12 You, also, Ethiopians, slain by his sword are you!
ZEP 2:13 And he will stretch out his hand against the north and destroy Assyria; And he will make Nineveh a desolation, dry as the wilderness.
ZEP 2:14 Herds will lie down in it, every beast of the earth, Desert owl and screech owl will lodge in its capitals. The owl will hoot in the window, the raven on the doorstep, all stripped bare of cedar.
ZEP 2:15 This is the exultant city which sat secure. The city who said to herself, I am and there is none else! How has she become a desolation! A lair of beasts! Every passerby hisses at her, shakes their hand.
ZEP 3:1 Woe to the rebellious and unclean city of oppression,
ZEP 3:2 She has not obeyed the voice, she has not accepted instruction, In the Lord she has not trusted, to her God she has not drawn near.
ZEP 3:3 Her rulers in her midst are roaring lions. Her judges are evening wolves, who leave nothing over until the morning,
ZEP 3:4 Her prophets are braggarts, faithless men. Her priests profane what is holy and do violence to the law.
ZEP 3:5 The Lord is righteous in her midst, he does no wrong, Morning by morning he establishes his decree, Light is not lacking, an oversight is unknown. But the unjust know no shame.
ZEP 3:6 ‘I have cut off nations, their turrets are destroyed; I have laid waste their broad streets, so that none passes over them. Desolate are their cities without people, without inhabitants.’
ZEP 3:7 I said: ‘Surely the city will fear me, she will accept instruction. Nothing will vanish from her eyes that I have impressed upon her; But the more zealously have they made all their deeds corrupt.’
ZEP 3:8 Wait for me, is the Lord’s message, until the day when I stand up as a witness, for it is my fixed purpose to gather the nations, to collect the kingdoms, to pour upon them my wrath and my hot anger; for by the fire of my fury will all the earth be consumed.
ZEP 3:9 For then I will purify the lips of all peoples, so that they will all call on the Lord’s name, to serve him with one accord.
ZEP 3:10 From beyond the rivers of Cush my worshipers will bring me offerings.
ZEP 3:11 On that day you will no longer be ashamed of all your deeds by which you rebelled against me. For I will rid you of your proudly arrogant ones, and you will never again be haughty on my holy mountain.
ZEP 3:12 But I will leave in your midst a people humble and poor, and the remnant of Israel will trust in the name of the Lord.
ZEP 3:13 They will not do evil, nor speak falsehood, and a deceitful tongue will not be found in their mouth; but they will pasture and lie down, and no one will make them afraid.
ZEP 3:14 Cry out with joy, daughter of Zion, shout aloud, Israel! Rejoice and exult with all your heart, daughter of Jerusalem.
ZEP 3:15 The Lord has put away your adversaries, he has turned away your foes; the Lord is king in your midst, you will fear evil no more.
ZEP 3:16 In that day it will be said to Jerusalem: Fear not! Zion, let not your hands grow weak!
ZEP 3:17 The Lord your God is in your midst, a victorious hero. He will rejoice over you with joy, he will renew his love, he will exult over you with singing,
ZEP 3:18 as on a day of festival. I will take away from you your disgrace, and put away from you your reproach.
ZEP 3:19 I will destroy at that time all who afflict you. I will deliver the lame, and gather the outcast, I will make them an object of renown and fame in all the earth.
ZEP 3:20 I will do good to you, at the time when I gather you. For I will make you an object of fame and renown among all the peoples of the earth; when I bring back your captivity before your eyes. This says the Lord.
HAG 1:1 In the second year of Darius the king, on the first day of the sixth month, this message from the Lord came through Haggai the prophet to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest:
HAG 1:2 The Lord of hosts says: The people say that the time has not yet come to rebuild the temple of the Lord.
HAG 1:3 Then this message from the Lord came to Haggai the prophet:
HAG 1:4 Is it a time for you yourselves to live in your own well-roofed houses, while this temple lies in ruins?
HAG 1:5 The Lord of hosts says: Consider your past experiences.
HAG 1:6 You sow much, but bring in little; you eat, but you do not have enough; you drink, but are not filled; you clothe yourselves, but not enough to be warm; and those who earn wages, put those wages in a bag with holes.
HAG 1:7 The Lord of hosts says: Consider your experiences.
HAG 1:8 Go up to the mountains, and bring wood and rebuild the temple; then I will be pleased with it, and I will reveal my glory. The Lord says:
HAG 1:9 You looked for much, and it came to little; and when you brought the harvest home, I blew it away. Why? The Lord of hosts says: Because my temple lies in ruins, while you shelter in your own houses.
HAG 1:10 The heavens withhold the dew, and the earth withholds its fruit,
HAG 1:11 and I have called forth a drought upon the land and upon the mountains, and upon the grain and the new wine and the oil and upon that which the ground brings forth, and upon people and animals, and upon all the labor of your hands.
HAG 1:12 Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Joshua the son of Jehozadak the high priest, with all the rest of the people, obeyed the command of the Lord their God and the words of Haggai the prophet, as the Lord their God had sent him to them. They showed proper respect for the Lord.
HAG 1:13 Haggai, the prophet of the Lord, as the Lord commanded him, told the people: ‘The Lord says: I am with you.’
HAG 1:14 And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of Jehozadak the high priest, and the spirit of all the rest of the people, so that they came and worked on the temple of the Lord of hosts, their God,
HAG 1:15 in the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month. In the second year of Darius the king,
HAG 2:1 on the twenty-first day of the seventh month, this message from the Lord came to Haggai the prophet,
HAG 2:2 telling him to speak to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua, the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and to all the rest of the people:
HAG 2:3 Who is left among you that saw this temple in its former glory? And how do you see it now? Doesn’t it seem as though there is nothing there?
HAG 2:4 The Lord says: Yet now be strong, Zerubbabel, be strong, Joshua, son of Jehozadak, the high priest, be strong, all you people of the land. The Lord says: Begin the work, for I am with you. The Lord of hosts says:
HAG 2:5 When your ancestors left Egypt I made a promise to you, and I am still with you. Do not be afraid!
HAG 2:6 The Lord of hosts says: In a little while, I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the land.
HAG 2:7 And I will shake all nations, and the precious things of all nations will come here; and I will fill this temple with glory. The Lord of hosts says:
HAG 2:8 The silver is mine, and the gold is mine,
HAG 2:9 The later glory of this temple will be greater than the former. The Lord of hosts says: In this place I will grant prosperity. This is the message of the Lord of hosts.
HAG 2:10 In the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, this message from the Lord came to Haggai the prophet:
HAG 2:11 The Lord of hosts says: ‘Ask the priests for a ruling:
HAG 2:12 “If one carries consecrated meat in the fold of his garment, and with that garment touches bread, or stew, or wine, or oil, or any food, will it become holy?”’ And the priests answered: ‘No.’
HAG 2:13 Then said Haggai, ‘If one who is unclean by reason of a dead body touches any of these, will it be unclean?’ And the priests answered: ‘It would be unclean.’
HAG 2:14 Haggai replied: ‘So is this people and so is this nation before me, the Lord declares, and so is every work of their hands; and that which they offer there is unclean.
HAG 2:15 Think back from this day, before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of the Lord.
HAG 2:16 How were you? When you came to a heap of grain expecting twenty measures, there were only ten; when you came to the wine vat to draw out fifty vessels, there were only twenty.
HAG 2:17 “I struck all the work of your hands with blasting and blight, with mildew and with hail. Yet you didn’t turn to me,” says the Lord,
HAG 2:18 “Think back from this day, think! From the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, from the day when the foundations of the temple of the Lord were laid, and consider.
HAG 2:19 The seed is in the granary, but the vine and the fig tree and the pomegranate and the olive tree have not yet brought forth fruit. From this day will I bless you.”’
HAG 2:20 This message from the Lord came to Haggai a second time on the twenty-fourth day of the month:
HAG 2:21 Tell Zerubbabel, governor of Judah: I will shake the heavens and the earth;
HAG 2:22 and I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms; and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the nations; and I will overthrow the chariots, and those who ride in them; and the horses and their riders will come down, each by the sword of his fellow.
HAG 2:23 In that day, the Lord of hosts says, I will take you, Zerubbabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel, the Lord says, and will make you like a signet ring, for I have chosen you, the Lord of hosts says.
ZEC 1:1 In the eighth month in the second year of Darius, this message of the Lord came to the prophet Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo:
ZEC 1:2 The Lord was furious with your ancestors.
ZEC 1:3 So tell the people this message of the Lord of hosts: ‘Return to me,’ says the Lord of hosts, ‘and I will return to you’ says the Lord of hosts.
ZEC 1:4 ‘Do not be like your ancestors to whom the former prophets cried, “The Lord of hosts says to turn now from your evil ways, and from your evil deeds”. They did not heed nor listen to me,’ says the Lord.
ZEC 1:5 ‘Your ancestors, where are they? And the prophets, do they live forever?
ZEC 1:6 But did not my words and my statutes with which I charged my servants the prophets overtake your ancestors? And they repented and said, “Just as the Lord of hosts planned to do to us, according to our ways, and according to our deeds, so he has dealt with us.”’
ZEC 1:7 In the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month, which is the month Shebat, in the second year of Darius, this message of the Lord came to the prophet Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo:
ZEC 1:8 I saw in the night a man on a red horse, among the myrtle trees that were in the valley-bottom. Behind him there were horses, red, sorrel, and white.
ZEC 1:9 Then said I, ‘My Lord, what are these?’ And the messenger who was talking with me said, ‘I will show you what they are.’
ZEC 1:10 And the man who was standing among the myrtle trees answered, ‘They are those whom the Lord has sent to patrol the earth.’
ZEC 1:11 And the riders answered the messenger of the Lord who was standing among the myrtle trees, ‘We have gone up and down through the world and behold, all the earth is still and at peace.’
ZEC 1:12 Then the messenger of the Lord said, ‘Lord of hosts, how long will you have no pity for Jerusalem and the cities of Judah with which you have been angry for seventy years?’
ZEC 1:13 And the Lord answered the messenger who was talking with me with kind and comforting words.
ZEC 1:14 So the messenger who was talking with me said to me, ‘Proclaim now that the Lord of hosts says: I am deeply concerned for Jerusalem.
ZEC 1:15 But I am deeply angry with the arrogant, complacent nations. I was only a little angry with Israel but they made the suffering worse.
ZEC 1:16 Therefore, says the Lord, I am turning to show mercy to Jerusalem. My temple will be rebuilt in it, says the Lord of hosts, and a measuring line will be stretched over Jerusalem.
ZEC 1:17 Proclaim again: Thus says the Lord of hosts: My cities will again overflow with prosperity and the Lord will again comfort Zion and choose Jerusalem.’
ZEC 1:18 Now I looked up and saw four horns.
ZEC 1:19 I said to the messenger who was talking with me, ‘What are these?’ He answered, ‘These are the horns which scattered Judah, Israel and Jerusalem.’
ZEC 1:20 Then the Lord showed me four smiths.
ZEC 1:21 I said, ‘What are these coming to do?’ He answered, ‘The horns scattered Judah, so that no one dared lift their head. But the smiths have come to terrify them, to crush the horns of the nations which lifted up their horn against the land of Judah to scatter its people.’
ZEC 2:1 Then I looked up and saw a man with a measuring line in his hand.
ZEC 2:2 I said, ‘Where are you going?’ He replied, ‘To measure Jerusalem, to see what is its breadth and length.’
ZEC 2:3 Then the messenger who talked with me stepped forward, and another messenger went out to meet him,
ZEC 2:4 and said to him, ‘Run and tell to that young man that Jerusalem will be inhabited like a village without walls, because so many people and cattle will live there.
ZEC 2:5 For I, says the Lord, will be a wall of fire her, and I will be the glory in the midst of her.
ZEC 2:6 Up! Away! Flee from the land of the north, says the Lord. For I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heavens, says the Lord.
ZEC 2:7 Up, escape to Zion, you who live in Babylon.
ZEC 2:8 This is what the Lord of hosts says to the nations which plundered you: Whoever touches you touches the apple of my eye.
ZEC 2:9 I will raise my hand against them. They will be plunder for their own slaves; and you will know that the Lord of hosts has sent me.
ZEC 2:10 ‘Sing and rejoice, daughter of Zion! I am coming, I will live among you, says the Lord.
ZEC 2:11 Many nations will join themselves to the Lord in that day, and will be his people, and he will live among you. You will know that the Lord of hosts has sent me to you.
ZEC 2:12 The Lord will inherit Judah as his portion in the holy land. He will again choose Jerusalem.
ZEC 2:13 Be silent, everyone, in the presence of the Lord, because he is coming from his holy dwelling.’
ZEC 3:1 Then he showed me Joshua, the high priest, standing before the messenger of the Lord and the Adversary standing at his right hand to accuse him.
ZEC 3:2 And the messenger of the Lord said to the Adversary, ‘May the Lord rebuke you, Adversary! The Lord, who has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke you! Is not this man a brand plucked out of the fire?’
ZEC 3:3 Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments and was standing before the messenger.
ZEC 3:4 The messenger said to those who stood before him, ‘Take off his filthy garments.’ Then to Joshua he said, ‘I have taken your guilt from you and I will clothe you in priestly robes.’
ZEC 3:5 And he ordered: ‘Set a clean turban upon his head.’ So they set a clean turban on his head, and clothed him with garments. The messenger of the Lord was standing by.
ZEC 3:6 And the messenger of the Lord testified to Joshua:
ZEC 3:7 The Lord of hosts says: ‘If you walk in my ways, and if you will keep my instructions, then you will rule my house and keep my courts and I will give you a place of access among these that stand by.
ZEC 3:8 Hear now, Joshua the high priest, you and your associates who sit before me; for they are men who are a sign; for I am going to bring forth my servant the Branch.
ZEC 3:9 On the stone that I have set before Joshua, on one stone, are seven facets. I will engrave it,’ says the Lord of hosts, ‘and I will remove the guilt of that land in one day.
ZEC 3:10 On that day,’ says the Lord of hosts, ‘you will each invite your neighbour under the vine and under the fig tree.’
ZEC 4:1 Then the messenger who talked with me came again and woke me, as someone who is woken from sleep.
ZEC 4:2 He said to me, ‘What do you see?’ I said, ‘I see a candlestick, all of gold, with a bowl on its top, and seven lamps on it. There are seven pipes to each of the lamps, which are on its top,
ZEC 4:3 and two olive trees next to it, one on the right side of the bowl, and the other on its left side.’
ZEC 4:4 I said to the messenger who talked with me, ‘What are these, my lord?’
ZEC 4:5 Then the messenger who talked with me answered, ‘Don’t you know what these are?’ And I said. ‘No, my lord.’
ZEC 4:6 He said to me, ‘This is the message of the Lord regarding Zerubbabel: Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, says the Lord of hosts,
ZEC 4:7 will I make the great mountain before Zerubbabel a plain. He will bring forth the top stones with shoutings of, “Grace, grace, to it.”’
ZEC 4:8 Moreover this message of the Lord came to me:
ZEC 4:9 The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house. His hands will also finish it. Then you will know that the Lord of hosts has sent me to you.
ZEC 4:10 For who has despised the day of small things? They will rejoice, and will see the plumb line in the hand of Zerubbabel. (The seven lamps are the eyes of the Lord that search all around the world.)
ZEC 4:11 Again I asked, ‘What are these two olive trees on the right side of the candlestick and on its left side?’
ZEC 4:12 Again, ‘What are these two branches of the olive trees, which are pouring out the golden oil through the two golden pipes?’
ZEC 4:13 He answered me, ‘Don’t you now what these are?’ And I said, ‘No, my lord.’
ZEC 4:14 Then he explained, ‘They are the two anointed ones who attend the Lord of all the earth.’
ZEC 5:1 Then again I looked up and saw a flying scroll.
ZEC 5:2 He said to me, ‘What do you see?’ I answered, ‘I see a flying scroll; twenty cubits long, ten cubits wide.’
ZEC 5:3 Then he said to me, ‘This is the curse that goes over the whole land. Every thief will be banished according to the writing on one side and everyone who lies under oath will be banished according to the writing on the other side.
ZEC 5:4 I have sent it out, says the Lord of hosts, and it will enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of anyone who swears falsely by my name. It will remain in the midst of his house and will consume it with its timber and its stones.’
ZEC 5:5 Then the messenger who talked with me came forward, and said to me, ‘Look up and see what is now coming.’
ZEC 5:6 I said. ‘What is it?’ He said, ‘It is a measuring basket, full of the guilt of the land.’
ZEC 5:7 A round leaden cover was lifted up, and there was a woman sitting in the middle of the basket.
ZEC 5:8 He said, ‘This is Wickedness.’ He thrust her down into the midst of the basket and he pushed the round leaden cover back on its mouth.
ZEC 5:9 Then I looked up and saw two women, and the wind was in their wings. They had wings like the wings of a stork and they lifted up the basket between them.
ZEC 5:10 Then I said to the messenger who talked with me, ‘Where are they taking the basket?’
ZEC 5:11 He said to me, ‘To build her a house in the land of Shinar. When it is prepared, they will rest the basket there.’
ZEC 6:1 Again I looked up, and saw four chariots come from between two mountains. The mountains were mountains of bronze.
ZEC 6:2 The first chariot had red horses. The second chariot had black horses,
ZEC 6:3 the third chariot white horses, and the fourth chariot dappled horses.
ZEC 6:4 Then I said to the messenger who talked with me, ‘What are these, my lord?’
ZEC 6:5 The messenger answered me, ‘These are the four winds of heaven going out after standing before the Lord of all the earth.
ZEC 6:6 The black horses are going toward the north country and the white toward the west and the dappled toward the south country.’
ZEC 6:7 The strong horses came out, and were impatient to patrol the earth. So he said, ‘Go, patrol the earth,’ and they did so.
ZEC 6:8 Then he cried out to me, ‘The horses that went to the north country will quiet my spirit in the north country.’
ZEC 6:9 Now this message of the Lord came to me:
ZEC 6:10 Take the gifts from the exiles Heldai, Tobijah and Jedaiah who have come from Babylon and go at once to Josiah the son of Zephaniah.
ZEC 6:11 Take their silver and gold and make a crown and set it on the head of the high priest, Joshua son of Jehozadak.
ZEC 6:12 Tell him: ‘Thus says the Lord of hosts: Behold, the man whose name is the Branch. He will branch out from his place and rebuild the temple of the Lord.
ZEC 6:13 He will rebuild the temple and will sit and rule upon his throne, receiving the honour due to a king. A priest will stand by his throne and they will work together in peace and harmony.
ZEC 6:14 The crown will be a memorial in the temple of the Lord for Heldai and Tobijah and Jedaiah, and Josiah the son of Zephaniah.
ZEC 6:15 People from far away will come and build in the temple of the Lord and you will know that the Lord of hosts has sent me to you. This will happen if you diligently obey the voice of the Lord your God.’
ZEC 7:1 In the fourth year of the reign of King Darius, on the fourth day of Chislev, the ninth month, the message of the Lord came to Zechariah.
ZEC 7:2 The city of Bethel had sent Sharezer and Regem-melech and their men, to entreat the favour of the Lord,
ZEC 7:3 and to ask the priests of the house of the Lord of hosts, and the prophets ‘Should I continue to mourn in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done for many years?’
ZEC 7:4 Then this message of the Lord of hosts came to me:
ZEC 7:5 Tell all the people of the land and the priests, ‘When you fasted and mourned in the fifth and in the seventh month, for these seventy years, did you really fast for me?
ZEC 7:6 When you eat and when you drink, do you not eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves?
ZEC 7:7 Wasn’t it this which the Lord proclaimed by the earlier prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and prosperous, and her towns surrounding her and the Negreb and the Shephelah were inhabited?’
ZEC 7:8 The Lord gave this message to Zechariah:
ZEC 7:9 The Lord of hosts says, execute true judgments. Show kindness and mercy to each other.
ZEC 7:10 Do not oppress the widow or the orphan, the resident foreigner or the poor. Let none of you devise evil against another in your hearts.
ZEC 7:11 But they refused to listen, and turned a stubborn shoulder, and stopped their ears so they wouldn’t hear.
ZEC 7:12 They made their hearts as hard as stone so they wouldn’t accept the teaching and the words that the Lord of hosts had sent by his spirit through the earlier prophets. Great was the anger of the Lord of hosts:
ZEC 7:13 I called and they would not hear, so they call and I do not hear, says the Lord of hosts.
ZEC 7:14 I scattered them by a whirlwind out among nations unknown to them. The land was left desolate behind them, with no one crossing or returning, for they made the pleasant land a desolation.
ZEC 8:1 Now this message of the Lord of hosts came to me:
ZEC 8:2 The Lord of hosts says: I passionately care for Zion, and I am fiercely protective of her.
ZEC 8:3 The Lord says, I have returned to Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem and Jerusalem will be called, “The City of Truth” and the mountain of the Lord of hosts, “The Holy Mountain.”
ZEC 8:4 The Lord of hosts says: Old men and old women will sit again in the squares of Jerusalem, each leaning on a staff because of old age.
ZEC 8:5 And the streets of the city will be full of boys, and of girls playing in its squares.
ZEC 8:6 The Lord of hosts says: Just because it seems impossible to the remnant of this people in these days, is it also impossible for me? says the Lord of hosts.
ZEC 8:7 The Lord of hosts says: I will rescue my people from the land of the east and the land of the west.
ZEC 8:8 I will bring them and they will live in Jerusalem, and they will be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and righteousness.
ZEC 8:9 The Lord of hosts says: Let your hands be strong, you who hear in these days the words of the prophets spoken when the foundations for the house of the Lord of hosts were laid.
ZEC 8:10 For before those days there were no wages for people or animals. No one could go out or return safe from enemies, because I set each against their neighbour.
ZEC 8:11 But now I will treat the remnant of the people differently from former days, says the Lord of hosts.
ZEC 8:12 Peace will be sown. The vine will bear its fruit and the ground will yield its produce, and the skies will give their dew. I will give the remnant of this people all these things.
ZEC 8:13 Just as you were accursed among the nations, house of Judah and house of Israel, so I will save you and you will be a blessing. Do not be afraid, but let your hands be strong.
ZEC 8:14 For the Lord of hosts says: As I planned to do evil to you when your ancestors provoked me to anger, says the Lord of hosts, and I did not relent,
ZEC 8:15 so again have I planned in these days to do good to Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. Do not be afraid.
ZEC 8:16 These are the things that you should do: Speak the truth to each other. Render peaceful decisions in your gates.
ZEC 8:17 Let none of you devise evil in your heart against one another. Do not love perjury. All these are things I hate, says the Lord.
ZEC 8:18 And this message of the Lord of hosts came to me:
ZEC 8:19 The Lord of hosts says: The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, will be festivals of joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts for the house of Judah. Therefore love truth and peace.
ZEC 8:20 The Lord of hosts says: Peoples, and the inhabitants of many cities will come,
ZEC 8:21 and the inhabitants of one city will go to another, saying, ‘Let us go speedily to entreat the favour of the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts; I will go also.’
ZEC 8:22 Many peoples and strong nations will come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to entreat the favour of the Lord.
ZEC 8:23 The Lord of hosts says: In those days ten people from all languages and nations will take hold of the robe of a Jew, saying, ‘We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.’
ZEC 9:1 An oracle: The message of the Lord concerns the land of Hadrach, it rests upon Damascus. For the capital of Aram belongs to the Lord, as the tribes of Israel do,
ZEC 9:2 and also Hamath which borders on it. Tyre and Sidon, for all their wisdom.
ZEC 9:3 Tyre built for herself a fortress. Heaped up silver as dust, and gold like the dirt of the streets.
ZEC 9:4 But now the Lord will dispossess her, cast down her rampart into the sea. She will be consumed in fire.
ZEC 9:5 Ashkelon will see and fear, and Gaza writhe in anguish, Ekron, also for her hope will be put to shame. The king will perish from Gaza, Ashkelon will remain uninhabited.
ZEC 9:6 A foreign people will settle in Ashdod, and I will humble the pride of the Philistines.
ZEC 9:7 I will take their blood from their mouth, and their abominations from between their teeth. They also will be a remnant for our God, like a tribe in Judah, and Ekron will be like the Jebusites.
ZEC 9:8 But I will encamp as a guard about my house, so that none will pass through or return, and no oppressor will pass through them again, for now I have seen with my own eyes.
ZEC 9:9 Rejoice greatly, daughter of Zion! Shout aloud, daughter of Jerusalem! Look, your king comes to you. Vindicated and victorious is he, humble, and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey.
ZEC 9:10 He will cut off chariots from Ephraim, and war horses from Jerusalem. The battle bow will be cut off, and he will speak peace to the nations. His rule will be from sea to sea, from the river to the ends of the earth.
ZEC 9:11 And you, too – because of your blood covenant, I have set free your prisoners from the waterless pit.
ZEC 9:12 To the stronghold will the prisoners of hope return. This day I declare, I will restore double to you.
ZEC 9:13 For I have bent Judah to me, like a bow which I have filled with Ephraim like an arrow. I will urge your sons, Zion, against the sons of Greece, I will make you like the sword of a hero.
ZEC 9:14 Then the Lord will be seen above them and his arrow will go forth like lightning. The Lord will blow a blast upon a trumpet, and travel on the whirlwinds of the south.
ZEC 9:15 The Lord of hosts will defend them. They will devour and tread down the slingstones, they will drink their blood like wine, they will be full like a bowl, like the crevices of the altar.
ZEC 9:16 And the Lord their God will save them on that day, as the flock of his people, as the jewel of a crown shining in his land.
ZEC 9:17 How good and how beautiful will it be! Corn will make the young men flourish and new wine the young women!
ZEC 10:1 Ask from the Lord rain, at the time of spring rain, from the Lord who forms the storm clouds, and the showers of rain he gives to you, and green in the field.
ZEC 10:2 But the household gods speak nonsense, and the diviners see lies, and relate idle dreams. In vain they offer comfort, so the people wander like sheep, They suffer because there is no shepherd.
ZEC 10:3 My wrath is hot against the shepherds, and on the leaders will I bring punishment. For the Lord cares for his flock, the house of Judah, and will make them his splendid war steeds.
ZEC 10:4 From Judah will come the cornerstone and the stay, from them the battle bow, from them goes forth every commander.
ZEC 10:5 Together they will trample on warriors, as on the dirt of the streets in battle. They fight, for the Lord is with them, putting the riders on horses to shame.
ZEC 10:6 I will make strong the house of Judah, I will bring deliverance to the house of Joseph, I will bring them back for I have compassion on them, they will be as if I had not driven them away. For I am the Lord their God and will answer them.
ZEC 10:7 The Ephraimites will be like warriors, their hearts will rejoice as with wine, their children will see and rejoice. Their hearts will exult in the Lord.
ZEC 10:8 I will whistle for them, and gather them, and they will be as many as they once were.
ZEC 10:9 I will sow them among the peoples, but in distant lands they will remember me, and they will bring up their children and come back.
ZEC 10:10 I will bring them home from the land of Egypt, and from Assyria will I gather them. Into the land of Gilead and Lebanon I will bring them, until the land overflows with them.
ZEC 10:11 And when they pass through the sea of distress, I will strike down the waves of the sea, and all the deeps of the Nile will be dried up. The pride of Assyria will be brought low and the sceptre of Egypt turned aside.
ZEC 10:12 I will make them strong in the Lord, they will walk in his name, says the Lord.
ZEC 11:1 Open your doors, Lebanon, so that fire may devour your cedars.
ZEC 11:2 Wail, pine-tree, for the cedar is fallen. Wail, oaks of Bashan, for the inaccessible forest has fallen.
ZEC 11:3 Listen to the wailing of the shepherds! Their glory is destroyed. Listen to the roaring of young lions! Blasted is the thick forest of the Jordan.
ZEC 11:4 The Lord said to me: shepherd the flock destined for slaughter,
ZEC 11:5 whose possessors slaughter them, and hold themselves not guilty! The people who sell them say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich! And their own shepherds have no compassion for them.
ZEC 11:6 I will no longer have pity on the people of this earth, says the Lord. I will turn neighbour against neighbour, and put everyone under the power of a king, and when the land is devastated I will not rescue them.
ZEC 11:7 So I shepherded the flock of slaughter for the sheep-merchants. I took two staffs: one I called Mercy and the other I called Union. So I shepherded the sheep.
ZEC 11:8 I set aside three of the shepherds in one month; for I was indignant against them, and they also were displeased at me.
ZEC 11:9 I said, I will not shepherd you. What is dead, let it die. What is set aside, let it be set aside. And let those who are left devour one another’s flesh.
ZEC 11:10 And I took my staff, Mercy, and broke it, so as to break my covenant which I had made with all the peoples.
ZEC 11:11 In that day it was broken, and the sheep-merchants who watched me knew that it was the Lord’s message.
ZEC 11:12 And I said to them, ‘If it is good in your sight, give me my wage. If not, don’t.’ So they weighed out my wage, thirty pieces of silver.
ZEC 11:13 And the Lord said to me, Cast it into the treasury – the precious wage that at which I was valued by them! So I took the thirty pieces of silver and cast them into the house of the Lord, into the treasury.
ZEC 11:14 Then I broke my second staff called Union so as to dissolve the brotherhood between Judah and Jerusalem.
ZEC 11:15 And the Lord said to me: Take again the implements of a worthless shepherd.
ZEC 11:16 For I am about to appoint a shepherd over the land. Those who are thrust down he will not visit. Those who are scattered he will not seek out. The wounded he will not heal, the sick he will not make whole, but the flesh of the fat he will devour and even their hoofs he will tear.
ZEC 11:17 Woe to my worthless shepherd, who deserts the flock! May the sword strike his arm and his right eye. May his arm completely wither. And his right eye be blinded.
ZEC 12:1 An oracle. This is the message of the Lord about Israel. The Lord who stretches out the heavens, and lays the foundation of the earth, and forms the human spirit within people says:
ZEC 12:2 Look! I am about to make Jerusalem a cup of drunkenness for all the surrounding peoples. There will be a siege of Jerusalem.
ZEC 12:3 On that day that I will make Jerusalem a stone to be lifted up by all the peoples. All who lift it up will surely hurt themselves! And all the nations of the earth will be gathered together against it.
ZEC 12:4 On that day, says the Lord, I will strike every horse with panic and its rider with madness. But over the house of Judah I will keep watch, though I strike every horse belonging to the peoples with blindness.
ZEC 12:5 And the chieftains of Judah will say to themselves, ‘The strength of the inhabitants is in the Lord of hosts their God.’
ZEC 12:6 In that day I will make the chieftains of Judah like a pan of fire in the woods, like a torch among sheaves, they will devour right and left all the surrounding peoples. But Jerusalem will abide on its own site.
ZEC 12:7 And the Lord will first give victory to the tents of Judah, so that the glory of the house of David, and of the inhabitants of Jerusalem be not exalted above Judah.
ZEC 12:8 In that day the Lord will protect the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the feeblest among them will in that day be like David, and the house of David like God, like the messenger of the Lord before them.
ZEC 12:9 And in that day I will seek to destroy all the nations who have come up against Jerusalem.
ZEC 12:10 And I will pour out on the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of pity and compassion. They will look on him whom they have pierced and they will lament for him as one laments for an only son. They will bitterly grieve for him as one grieves for the firstborn.
ZEC 12:11 In that day mourning will be as great in Jerusalem as the mourning for Hadad-rimmon in the plain of Megiddo.
ZEC 12:12 And the land will mourn, each family by itself: the family of the house of David by itself, and their wives by themselves, and the family of the house of Nathan by itself, and their wives by themselves,
ZEC 12:13 and the family of the house of Levi by itself, and their wives by themselves, the family of the Shimeites by itself, and their wives by themselves,
ZEC 12:14 and all the families who are left, each by itself, and their wives by themselves.
ZEC 13:1 On that day a fountain will be opened for the house of David, and for the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness.
ZEC 13:2 And it will be on that day, says the Lord of hosts, I will cut off the names of the idols from the land and they will be remembered no more. And the prophets and the unclean spirit I will banish from the land.
ZEC 13:3 If any man prophesy any more, his father and his mother who bore him, will say to him, ‘You will not live, for you speak falsehood in the name of the Lord.’ And his father and his mother who bore him will stab him through when he is seized by the prophetic frenzy.
ZEC 13:4 And it will be in that day that the prophets will be ashamed, each of his vision, and will not wear the hairy mantle in order to deceive.
ZEC 13:5 Each will say, ‘I am not a prophet, a tiller of the ground am I, for the ground is my possession from my youth.’
ZEC 13:6 And they will say to him, ‘What are these scars on your back?’ And he will say, ‘The scars which I received in the house of my friends.’
ZEC 13:7 Awake, sword, against my shepherd, against the man who stands near to me, says the Lord of hosts. I will strike the shepherd so that the sheep may be scattered, I will turn my hand against the little ones.
ZEC 13:8 In all the land, says the Lord, two-thirds in it will be cut off and die, but a third will be left in it.
ZEC 13:9 I will bring the third into the fire, and melt it as one melts silver, and test it as one tests gold. Then they will call on my name, and I myself will answer them. I will say, ‘They are my people.’ They will say, ‘The Lord is our God.’
ZEC 14:1 A day is coming for the Lord, when your plundered possessions will be divided while you watch.
ZEC 14:2 And all the nations will gather to Jerusalem, to fight against it. The city will be taken and the houses plundered and the women raped. Half of the city will go into captivity, and the rest of the people left in the ruins.
ZEC 14:3 Then the Lord will go forth and fight against these nations, as once he fought in the day of battle.
ZEC 14:4 On that day his feet will stand on the Mount of Olives, (which is opposite Jerusalem, on the east). The Mount of Olives will be split into halves, from east to west, by an exceedingly great valley; and half of the mountain will slide northwards and half southwards.
ZEC 14:5 You will escape through my valley – the valley between the hills will extend as far as Azel, and you will flee as you fled from before the earthquake, in the days of Uzziah king of Judah. But the Lord your God will come, and all the holy ones with him.
ZEC 14:6 And in that day, there will be no heat nor cold nor frost,
ZEC 14:7 but it will be constant day – it is known to the Lord – with neither day nor night. Even at evening time there will be light.
ZEC 14:8 And on that day living waters will flow from Jerusalem, half of them to the eastern sea and half of them to the western sea; in both summer and winter.
ZEC 14:9 The Lord will be king over all the earth. On that day the Lord will be one, and his name one.
ZEC 14:10 The land will be changed to plain, from Geba to Rimmon, south of Jerusalem, but Jerusalem will be high and inhabited as it stands, from the Benjamin Gate up to the place of the first gate, and from the Tower of Hananel to the Corner Gate, and as far as the king’s winepresses.
ZEC 14:11 Jerusalem will be inhabited, for never again will it be doomed to destruction, and its people will abide in security.
ZEC 14:12 This is the plague with which the Lord will strike all the peoples who array themselves against Jerusalem: he will make their flesh rot while they stand on their feet, and their eyes will rot in their sockets, and their tongues will rot in their mouth.
ZEC 14:13 On that day a great panic sent by the Lord will fall on them. Everyone will seize their neighbours and attack them.
ZEC 14:14 Even Judah will fight at Jerusalem, and the wealth of the surrounding nations will be gathered up – gold and silver and piles of clothing.
ZEC 14:15 Plague will fall upon the horses, mules, camels, and donkeys, and on all the animals in all those camps.
ZEC 14:16 All who are left of all the nations which fought against Jerusalem will come up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the pilgrim-feast of tabernacles.
ZEC 14:17 Whoever of all the peoples of the earth will not come up to Jerusalem to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, on them there will be no rain.
ZEC 14:18 If the family of Egypt does not go up nor enter in, on them also will come the plague with which the Lord will strike the nations.
ZEC 14:19 This will be the punishment for the sin of Egypt and the punishment for the sin of all nations which do not come up to keep the feast of the tabernacles.
ZEC 14:20 On that day there will be inscribed upon the bells of the horses, “Holy to the Lord” and the pots in the house of the Lord will be as holy as the sacrificial bowls before the altars.
ZEC 14:21 Every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah will be holy to the Lord of hosts and all who sacrifice will come and take of them and cook the sacrifices in them. There will be no more traffickers in the house of the Lord of hosts in that day.
MAL 1:1 An oracle. The message of the Lord to Israel through Malachi.
MAL 1:2 ‘I have loved you,’ says the Lord. ‘But you ask, “How have you shown love to us?” Was not Esau Jacob’s brother?’ explains the Lord of hosts, ‘yet I loved Jacob,
MAL 1:3 but hated Esau, and made his mountains a desolation, and transformed his ancestral land into a wilderness.
MAL 1:4 When Edom says, “We are beaten down, but we will return and rebuild the ruined places”’ the Lord of hosts says, ‘They may build, but I will throw down. They will be called, “The border land of wickedness,” the people against whom the Lord is angry forever.
MAL 1:5 Your own eyes will see this, and you will say, “the Lord’s greatness reaches beyond the border of Israel.”’
MAL 1:6 ‘A son honours his father and servant their master. If I am a father, where is my honour? And if I am a master, where is the one who fears me? So says the Lord to you, priests who despise my name. You ask, “How have we despised your name?”
MAL 1:7 You offer on my altar bread that is polluted. You ask, “How have we polluted it?” Because you say, “The table of the Lord is contemptible.”
MAL 1:8 When you offer the blind animal for sacrifice, “It doesn’t matter!” And when you offer the lame and the sick “It doesn’t matter!” Give an animal like that to your governor; will he be pleased with it? Will he receive you favourably?’ says the Lord of hosts.
MAL 1:9 Now, plead for the favour of God with such an offering, so that he may be gracious to us. ‘Would I receive any of you favourably?’ says the Lord of hosts.
MAL 1:10 ‘If only one of you would shut the temple doors, so that you could not kindle useless fires on my altar! I have no pleasure in you,’ says the Lord of hosts, ‘Nor will I accept an offering from your hand.
MAL 1:11 For from the rising of the sun to its setting my name is great among the nations, and in every place they offer to my name a pure offering. For my name is great among the nations,’ says the Lord of hosts.
MAL 1:12 ‘But you profane me when you say, “The table of the Lord is polluted, and its food is contemptible.”
MAL 1:13 You say also, “How tired we are of all this!” and you sniff contemptuously at it. You have brought the blind, the lame and the sick as offerings. Should I accept this from your hand?’ says the Lord of hosts.
MAL 1:14 ‘Cursed be the cheat, who has in his flock a valuable male, but vows and sacrifices to the Lord a blemished animal! For I am a great king,’ says the Lord of hosts, ‘and my name is feared among the nations.’
MAL 2:1 ‘Now, you priests, this command is for you.
MAL 2:2 If you will not hear, and if you do not take it to heart, to give glory to my name,’ says the Lord of hosts, ‘Then I will lay a curse on you. I will turn your blessings into curses. Indeed I have already done so, because you pay no attention.
MAL 2:3 I will punish your descendants! I will spread offal upon your faces, even the offal of your pilgrim feasts, you will be discarded.
MAL 2:4 You will then know that I have sent this command to you, so that my covenant with Levi may be preserved,’ says the Lord of hosts.
MAL 2:5 ‘My covenant with him was to give life and peace. I gave them to him so that he might revere me. He revered me, and stood in awe of my name.
MAL 2:6 The true instruction was in his mouth, and injustice was not found in his lips; He walked with me in peace and uprightness, and turned many away from iniquity.
MAL 2:7 For the priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and people should seek the law from his mouth, because he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.
MAL 2:8 ‘But you have turned aside from that way. You have caused many to stumble in the law. You have corrupted the covenant of Levi,’ says the Lord of hosts.
MAL 2:9 ‘So I have I made you contemptible and degraded before all the people, because you have not kept my ways, and have had no respect for me in imparting the law.’
MAL 2:10 Don’t we have all one father? Didn’t one God created us? Why do we deal faithlessly with one another, profaning the covenant of our ancestors?
MAL 2:11 Judah is treacherous, and abominations are committed in Israel and in Jerusalem because Judah has profaned the holy things loved by the Lord, and has married the daughter of a foreign god.
MAL 2:12 May the Lord banish from the community of Jacob anyone who does this, anyone awaking, testifying, and making an offering to the Lord of hosts.
MAL 2:13 And you also do this: You cover the altar of the Lord with tears, because he doesn’t accept the offering any more, doesn’t accept it from your hand.
MAL 2:14 Yet you ask, ‘Why?’ Because the Lord is testifying against you on behalf of the wife you married when you were young. You have been unfaithful to her, even though she is your companion, and your legal wife.
MAL 2:15 Did not the one God make everyone, so that all both flesh and spirit is his? And what does that one God seek but godly children? Therefore keep watch over your spirit, and let none of you deal faithlessly with the wife of your youth.
MAL 2:16 ‘A man who divorces or puts away his wife,’ says Lord, the God of Israel, ‘overwhelms her with cruelty.’ The Lord of hosts says: ‘Keep watch over your spirit, do not be unfaithful.’
MAL 2:17 You have wearied the Lord with your words. You ask, ‘How have we wearied him?’ By saying, ‘Everyone who does evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them.’ Or, ‘Where is the God of justice?’
MAL 3:1 ‘I am about to send my messenger and he will clear a path before me: And the Lord, who you are seeking, will suddenly come to his temple. The messenger of the covenant who you long for is already coming, says the Lord of hosts.
MAL 3:2 But who can endure the day of his coming? And who will stand firm when he appears? He is like a refiner’s fire, and like a launderer’s soap,
MAL 3:3 and he will sit as a refiner and purifier. He will purify the descendants of Levi, and refine them like gold and silver, until they are fit to bring offerings to the Lord.
MAL 3:4 Then will the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant to the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years.
MAL 3:5 ‘I will come to you in judgment. I will be quick to testify against the sorcerers, adulterers, perjurers, those who cheat workers, or widows, or orphans, deny justice to immigrants, and do not fear me,’ says the Lord of hosts.
MAL 3:6 ‘For I, the Lord, do not change; and you have not ceased to be descendants of Jacob.’
MAL 3:7 ‘From the days of your ancestors, you have turned aside from my statutes, and you have not kept them. Turn to me and I will turn to you,’ says the Lord. ‘You say, “How should we turn?”
MAL 3:8 Can a human rob God? Yet you robbed me. You ask, “How have we robbed you?” In tithes and gifts!
MAL 3:9 You – your entire nation – are all cursed, because you rob me.
MAL 3:10 ‘Bring the whole tithe into the storehouse, so that there is food in my house. Test me in this way. See if I will not open to you the windows of the sky, and pour you out a blessing, until there is more than enough.
MAL 3:11 I will rebuke for your sakes the devouring locust and he will not destroy your crops, nor will the vine fail to ripen its fruit in the field, says the Lord of hosts,
MAL 3:12 and all nations will call you happy, for you will be a delightful land,’ says the Lord of hosts.
MAL 3:13 ‘You have said terrible things about me,’ says the Lord. ‘You ask, “What have we said about you?”
MAL 3:14 You have said, “It is useless to serve God, and what do we gain from the Lord of hosts by keeping his commands, and walking mournfully in funeral garb before him?
MAL 3:15 So now we call the proud happy, evildoers thrive: they dare God and escape unharmed.”’
MAL 3:16 Such things those who revered the Lord spoke to one another, and the Lord took notice, and a record was written before him of those who revered the Lord and those who keep in mind his name.
MAL 3:17 ‘They will be mine,’ says the Lord of hosts, ‘my special possession on that day that I am preparing. I will spare them as a man spares his son who serves him.
MAL 3:18 Once again my people will see the difference between the righteous and the wicked, between the person who serves God and the person who does not.’
MAL 4:1 ‘The day is coming that will burn like a furnace, and all the proud and all evildoers will be stubble, and the day that is coming will burn them up,’ says the Lord of hosts, ‘leaving neither root nor branch.
MAL 4:2 But to you who revere my name there will arise the sun of righteousness with healing in its wings, and you will run free like calves let out from their stall.
MAL 4:3 In the day when I act you will tread down the wicked, they will be as ashes under the soles of your feet,’ says the Lord of hosts.
MAL 4:4 ‘Remember the law of Moses my servant, statutes and judgments which I gave him at Horeb for all Israel.
MAL 4:5 I am about to send to you Elijah the prophet, before the great and terrible day of the Lord comes.
MAL 4:6 He will turn fathers’ hearts to their sons and sons’ hearts to their fathers, so that I will not come and strike the earth with judgement.’
MAT 1:1 A genealogy of Jesus Christ, a descendant of David and Abraham.
MAT 1:2 Abraham was the father of Isaac, Isaac of Jacob, Jacob of Judah and his brothers,
MAT 1:3 Judah of Perez and Zerah, whose mother was Tamar, Perez of Hezron, Hezron of Aram,
MAT 1:4 Aram of Aminadab, Aminadab of Nahshon, Nahshon of Salmon,
MAT 1:5 Salmon of Boaz, whose mother was Rahab, Boaz of Obed, whose mother was Ruth, Obed of Jesse,
MAT 1:6 Jesse of David the King. David was the father of Solomon, whose mother was Uriah’s widow,
MAT 1:7 Solomon of Rehoboam, Rehoboam of Abijah, Abijah of Asa,
MAT 1:8 Asa of Jehoshaphat, Jehoshaphat of Joram, Joram of Uzziah,
MAT 1:9 Uzziah of Jotham, Jotham of Ahaz, Ahaz of Hezekiah,
MAT 1:10 Hezekiah of Manasseh, Manasseh of Amon, Amon of Josiah,
MAT 1:11 Josiah of Jechoniah and his brothers, at the time of the Exile to Babylon.
MAT 1:12 After the Exile to Babylon – Jechoniah was the father of Salathiel, Salathiel of Zerubbabel,
MAT 1:13 Zerubbabel of Abiud, Abiud of Eliakim, Eliakim of Azor,
MAT 1:14 Azor of Zadok, Zadok of Achim, Achim of Eliud,
MAT 1:15 Eliud of Eleazar, Eleazar of Matthan, Matthan of Jacob,
MAT 1:16 Jacob of Joseph, the husband of Mary, who was the mother of Jesus, who is called “Christ”.
MAT 1:17 So the whole number of generations from Abraham to David is fourteen; from David to the Exile to Babylon fourteen; and from the Exile to Babylon to the Christ fourteen.
MAT 1:18 This is how Jesus Christ was born: His mother Mary was engaged to Joseph, but, before the marriage took place, she found herself to be pregnant by the power of the Holy Spirit.
MAT 1:19 Her husband, Joseph, was a just man and, since he did not want to disgrace her publicly, he resolved to put an end to their engagement privately.
MAT 1:20 He had been thinking this over, when an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream. ‘Joseph, son of David,’ the angel said, ‘do not be afraid to take Mary for your wife, for her child has been conceived by the power of the Holy Spirit.
MAT 1:21 She will give birth to a son; name him Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.’
MAT 1:22 All this happened in fulfilment of these words of the Lord through the prophet, where he says –
MAT 1:23 “The virgin will conceive and will give birth to a son, and they will give him the name Immanuel” – a word which means “God is with us.”
MAT 1:24 When Joseph woke up, he did as the angel of the Lord had directed him.
MAT 1:25 He made Mary his wife, but they did not sleep together before the birth of her son; and to this son he gave the name Jesus.
MAT 2:1 After the birth of Jesus at Bethlehem in Judea, in the reign of King Herod, some astrologers from the East arrived in Jerusalem, asking,
MAT 2:2 ‘Where is the newborn king of the Jews? For we saw his star in the east, and have come to worship him.’
MAT 2:3 When King Herod heard of this, he was much troubled, and so too was all Jerusalem.
MAT 2:4 He called together all the chief priests and teachers of the Law in the nation, and questioned them as to where the Christ was to be born.
MAT 2:5 ‘At Bethlehem in Judea,’ was their answer, ‘for it is said in the prophet –
MAT 2:6 “And you, Bethlehem in Judah’s land, are in no way least among the chief cities of Judah, for out of you will come a ruler – who will shepherd my people Israel.”’
MAT 2:7 Then Herod secretly sent for the astrologers. He found out from them the time of the appearance of the star.
MAT 2:8 Sending them to Bethlehem he said, ‘Go and make a careful search for the child. When you have found him, bring word back to me, so that I, too, can go and worship him.’
MAT 2:9 The astrologers heard what the king had to say, and then continued their journey. The star which they had seen in the east led them on, until it reached and stood over the place where the child was.
MAT 2:10 At the sight of the star they were filled with joy.
MAT 2:11 Entering the house, they saw the child with his mother, Mary, and fell at his feet and worshipped him. Then they opened their treasure chests, and offered to the child presents of gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
MAT 2:12 But afterwards, having been warned in a dream not to go back to Herod, they returned to their own country by another road.
MAT 2:13 After they had left, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, and said, ‘Get up, take the child and his mother, and seek refuge in Egypt; and stay there until I tell you to return, for Herod is about to search for the child, to put him to death.’
MAT 2:14 Joseph woke up, and taking the child and his mother by night, went into Egypt,
MAT 2:15 and there he stayed until Herod’s death. This was in fulfilment of these words of the Lord in the prophet, where he says – “Out of Egypt I called my Son.”
MAT 2:16 When Herod found out that the astrologers had tricked him, he flew into a rage. He sent and put to death all the boys in Bethlehem and the whole of that region, who were two years old or under, guided by the time which he had learned from the astrologers.
MAT 2:17 Then were fulfilled these words spoken in the prophet Jeremiah, where he says –
MAT 2:18 “A voice was heard in Ramah, weeping and mourning loudly; Rachel, weeping for her children, refusing all comfort for they were dead.”
MAT 2:19 But, on the death of Herod, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, and said,
MAT 2:20 ‘Get up, take the child and his mother, and go into the Land of Israel, for those who sought to take the child’s life are dead.’
MAT 2:21 He woke up, and taking the child and his mother, went into the Land of Israel.
MAT 2:22 But, hearing that Archelaus had succeeded his father Herod as king of Judea, he was afraid to go back there; and having been warned in a dream, he went into the part of the country called Galilee.
MAT 2:23 There he settled in the town of Nazareth, in fulfilment of these words in the prophets – “He will be called a Nazarene.”
MAT 3:1 About that time John the Baptist first appeared, proclaiming in the wilderness of Judea:
MAT 3:2 ‘Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.’
MAT 3:3 John was the one who was spoken of in the prophet Isaiah, where he says – “The voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness: ‘Make ready the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.’”
MAT 3:4 John’s clothes were made of camels’ hair, with a leather strap round his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey.
MAT 3:5 At that time Jerusalem, and all Judea, as well as the whole district of the Jordan, went out to him
MAT 3:6 and were baptised by him in the Jordan River, confessing their sins.
MAT 3:7 But when John saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to receive his baptism, he said to them, ‘You children of snakes! Who has prompted you to seek refuge from the coming judgment?
MAT 3:8 Let your life, then, prove your repentance;
MAT 3:9 and do not think that you can say among yourselves “Abraham is our ancestor,” for I tell you that out of these stones God is able to raise descendants for Abraham!
MAT 3:10 Already the axe is lying at the root of the trees. Therefore every tree that fails to bear good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.
MAT 3:11 I, indeed, baptise you with water to teach repentance; but he who is coming after me is more powerful than I, and I am not fit even to carry his sandals. He will baptise you with the Holy Spirit and with fire.
MAT 3:12 His winnowing-fan is in his hand, and he will clear his threshing-floor, and store his grain in the barn, but the chaff he will burn with a fire that cannot be put out.’
MAT 3:13 Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan, to John, to be baptised by him.
MAT 3:14 But John tried to prevent him. ‘I need to be baptised by you,’ he said, ‘so why have you come to me?’
MAT 3:15 ‘This is the way it should be for now,’ Jesus answered, ‘because we should do everything that God requires.’ So John agreed.
MAT 3:16 After the baptism of Jesus, and just as he came up from the water, the heavens opened, and he saw the Spirit of God coming down like a dove and resting on him,
MAT 3:17 and from the heavens there came a voice which said, ‘This is my dearly loved son, who brings me great joy.’
MAT 4:1 Then Jesus was led up into the wilderness by the Spirit to be tempted by the devil.
MAT 4:2 And, after he had fasted for forty days and forty nights, he became hungry.
MAT 4:3 The Tempter came to him, and said: ‘If you are God’s Son, tell these stones to become loaves of bread.’
MAT 4:4 But Jesus answered, ‘Scripture says – “It is not on bread alone that a person is to live, but on every word that comes from the mouth of God.”’
MAT 4:5 Then the devil took him to the Holy City, and, placing him on the parapet of the temple, said to him,
MAT 4:6 ‘If you are God’s Son, throw yourself down, for scripture says – “He will give his angels commands about you, and on their hands they will lift you up, so you do not even strike your foot against a stone.”’
MAT 4:7 ‘Scripture also says,’ answered Jesus, ‘“You must not tempt the Lord your God.”’
MAT 4:8 The third time, the devil took Jesus to a very high mountain, and, showing him all the kingdoms of the world and their splendour, said to him:
MAT 4:9 ‘All these I will give you, if you will fall at my feet and worship me.’
MAT 4:10 Then Jesus said to him, ‘Go away, Satan! For scripture says – “You must worship the Lord your God, and worship him only.”’
MAT 4:11 Then the devil left him alone, and angels came and helped him.
MAT 4:12 When Jesus heard that John had been arrested, he returned to Galilee.
MAT 4:13 Afterwards, leaving Nazareth, he went and settled at Capernaum, which is by the side of the sea, within the borders of Zebulun and Naphtali;
MAT 4:14 in fulfilment of these words in the prophet Isaiah –
MAT 4:15 “The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, the land of the Road by the sea, and beyond the Jordan, with Galilee of the Gentiles –
MAT 4:16 The people who were living in darkness have seen a great light, and, for those who were living in the shadow-land of death, a light has dawned!”
MAT 4:17 At that time Jesus began to proclaim – ‘Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.’
MAT 4:18 As Jesus was walking along the shore of the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers – Simon, also known as Peter, and his brother Andrew – casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen.
MAT 4:19 ‘Come and follow me,’ Jesus said, ‘and I will teach you to fish for people.’
MAT 4:20 The two men left their nets at once and followed him.
MAT 4:21 Going further on, he saw two other men who were also brothers, James, Zebedee’s son, and his brother John, in their boat with their father, mending their nets. Jesus called them,
MAT 4:22 and they at once left their boat and their father, and followed him.
MAT 4:23 Jesus went all through Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom, and curing every kind of disease and every kind of sickness among the people;
MAT 4:24 and his fame spread all through Syria. They brought to him all who were ill with any form of disease, or who were suffering pain – any who were either possessed by demons, or were lunatic, or paralysed; and he cured them.
MAT 4:25 He was followed by large crowds from Galilee, the district of the Ten Towns, Jerusalem, Judea, and from beyond the Jordan.
MAT 5:1 On seeing the crowds of people, Jesus went up the hill; and, when he had taken his seat, his disciples came up to him;
MAT 5:2 and he began to teach them, saying:
MAT 5:3 ‘Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
MAT 5:4 Blessed are the mourners, for they will be comforted.
MAT 5:5 Blessed are the gentle, for they will inherit the earth.
MAT 5:6 Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be satisfied.
MAT 5:7 Blessed are the merciful, for they will find mercy.
MAT 5:8 Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God.
MAT 5:9 Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called children of God.
MAT 5:10 Blessed are those who have been persecuted in the cause of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
MAT 5:11 ‘Blessed are you when people insult you, and persecute you, and say all kinds of evil lies about you because of me.
MAT 5:12 Be glad and rejoice, because your reward in heaven will be great; this is the way they persecuted the prophets who lived before you.
MAT 5:13 ‘You are salt for the world. But if salt becomes tasteless, how can it be made salty again? It is no longer good for anything, but is thrown away, and trampled underfoot.
MAT 5:14 It is you who are the light of the world. A town that stands on a hill cannot be hidden.
MAT 5:15 People do not light a lamp and put it under a basket, but on the lamp-stand, where it gives light to everyone in the house.
MAT 5:16 Let your light so shine before the eyes of others so that, seeing your good actions, they will praise your Father who is in heaven.
MAT 5:17 ‘Do not think that I have come to do away with the Law or the prophets; I have not come to do away with them, but to complete them.
MAT 5:18 For I tell you, until the heavens and the earth disappear, not even the smallest letter, nor one stroke of a letter, will disappear from the Law until all is done.
MAT 5:19 Whoever, therefore, breaks one of these commandments, even the least of them, and teaches others to do so, will be the least esteemed in the kingdom of heaven; but whoever keeps them, and teaches others to do so, will be esteemed great in the kingdom of heaven.
MAT 5:20 Indeed I tell you that, unless you obey God’s commands better than of the teachers of the Law, and Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
MAT 5:21 ‘You have heard that to our ancestors it was said – “You must not commit murder,” and “Whoever commits murder will be brought to trial.”
MAT 5:22 But I say to you that anyone who is angry at their brother or sister will be brought to trial; and whoever insults their brother or sister will be brought before the High Council, while whoever calls them a fool will be in danger of the fires of Gehenna.
MAT 5:23 Therefore, when presenting your gift at the altar, if even there you remember that your brother or sister has something against you,
MAT 5:24 leave your gift there, before the altar, go and be reconciled to them, first, then come and present your gift.
MAT 5:25 Be ready to make friends with your opponent, even when you meet them on your way to the court; otherwise they might hand you over to the judge, and the judge to the judicial officer, and you will be thrown into prison.
MAT 5:26 I tell you, you will not come out until you have paid the last cent.
MAT 5:27 ‘You have heard that it was said – “You must not commit adultery.”
MAT 5:28 But I say to you that anyone who looks at a woman and desires her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
MAT 5:29 If your right eye causes you to sin, take it out and throw it away. It would be best for you to lose one part of your body, and not to have the whole of it thrown into Gehenna.
MAT 5:30 And, if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away. It would be best for you to lose one part of your body, and not to have the whole of it go down to Gehenna.
MAT 5:31 ‘It was also said – “Let anyone who divorces his wife serve her with a notice of separation.”
MAT 5:32 But I say to you that anyone who divorces his wife, except on the ground of some serious sexual sin, leads to her committing adultery; while anyone who marries her after her divorce is guilty of adultery.
MAT 5:33 Again, you have heard that our ancestors were told – “Do not break your oaths, keep your vows to the Lord.”
MAT 5:34 But I say to you that you must not swear at all, either by heaven, since that is God’s throne,
MAT 5:35 or by the earth, since that is his footstool, or by Jerusalem, since that is the city of the Great King.
MAT 5:36 Nor should you swear by your head, since you cannot make a single hair either white or black.
MAT 5:37 Let your words be simply “Yes” or “No”; anything beyond this comes from what is evil.
MAT 5:38 ‘You have heard that it was said – “An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.”
MAT 5:39 But I say to you that you must not resist those who wrong you; but, if anyone strikes you on the right cheek, turn the other to them also.
MAT 5:40 If someone sues you for your shirt, let them have your cloak as well.
MAT 5:41 If you are forced to carry a soldier’s pack for one mile, carry it two.
MAT 5:42 Give to anyone who asks and, if someone wants to borrow from you, do not turn them away.
MAT 5:43 You have heard that it was said – “You must love your neighbour and hate your enemy.”
MAT 5:44 But what I tell you is this: love your enemies, and pray for those who persecute you,
MAT 5:45 so that you may become children of your Father who is in heaven; for he causes his sun to rise on bad and good alike, and sends rain on the righteous and on the unrighteous.
MAT 5:46 For, if you love only those who love you, what reward will you have? Even the tax collectors do this!
MAT 5:47 And, if you only welcome your brothers and sisters, what are you doing more than others? Even the Gentiles do this!
MAT 5:48 You, then, must become perfect – as your heavenly Father is perfect.
MAT 6:1 ‘Take care not to perform your religious duties in public in order to be seen by others; if you do, your Father who is in heaven has no reward for you.
MAT 6:2 Therefore, when you do acts of charity, do not have a trumpet blown in front of you, as hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets so that people will praise them. There, I tell you, is their reward!
MAT 6:3 But, when you do acts of charity, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
MAT 6:4 so that your charity may be secret; and your Father, who sees what is in secret, will reward you.
MAT 6:5 ‘And, when you pray, you are not to behave as hypocrites do. They like to pray standing in the synagogues and at the corners of the streets, so that people will see them. There, I tell you, is their reward!
MAT 6:6 But, when one of you prays, they should go into their own room, shut the door, and pray to their Father who dwells in secret; and their Father, who sees what is secret, will reward them.
MAT 6:7 When praying, do not repeat the same words over and over again, as is done by the Gentiles, who think that by using many words they will obtain a hearing.
MAT 6:8 Do not imitate them; for God, your Father, knows what you need before you ask him.
MAT 6:9 You, therefore, should pray like this – “Our Father, who is in heaven, may your name be held holy,
MAT 6:10 your kingdom come, your will be done – on earth, as in heaven.
MAT 6:11 Give us today the bread that we will need;
MAT 6:12 and forgive us our wrongdoings, as we have forgiven those who have wronged us;
MAT 6:13 and take us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.”
MAT 6:14 For, if you forgive others their offences, your heavenly Father will forgive you also;
MAT 6:15 but, if you do not forgive others their offences, not even your Father will forgive your offences.
MAT 6:16 ‘And, when you fast, do not put on gloomy looks, as hypocrites do who disfigure their faces so that they may be seen by people to be fasting. That, I tell you, is their reward!
MAT 6:17 But, when one of you fasts, they should anoint their head and wash their face,
MAT 6:18 so that they may not be seen by people to be fasting, but by their Father who dwells in secret; and their Father, who sees what is secret, will reward them.
MAT 6:19 ‘Do not store up treasures for yourselves on earth, where moth and rust destroy, and where thieves break in and steal.
MAT 6:20 But store up treasures for yourselves in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys, and where thieves do not break in or steal.
MAT 6:21 For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
MAT 6:22 The lamp of the body is the eye. If your eye is unclouded, your whole body will be lit up;
MAT 6:23 but, if your eye is diseased, your whole body will be darkened. And, if the inner light is darkness, how intense must that darkness be!
MAT 6:24 No one can serve two masters, for either they will hate one and love the other, or else they will attach themselves to one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and Money.
MAT 6:25 ‘This is why I say to you, Do not be anxious about your life – what you can get to eat or drink, or about your body – what you can get to wear. Is not life more than food, and the body more than clothing?
MAT 6:26 Look at the wild birds – they neither sow, nor reap, nor gather into barns; and yet your heavenly Father feeds them! Aren’t you more precious than they?
MAT 6:27 But which of you, by being anxious, can prolong their life a single moment?
MAT 6:28 And why be anxious about clothing? Study the wild lilies, and how they grow. They neither toil nor spin;
MAT 6:29 yet I tell you that even Solomon in all his splendour was not robed like one of these.
MAT 6:30 If God so clothes even the grass of the field, which is living today and tomorrow will be thrown into the oven, won’t he much more clothe you, you of little faith?
MAT 6:31 Do not then ask anxiously “What can we get to eat?” or “What can we get to drink?” or “What can we get to wear?”
MAT 6:32 All these are the things for which the nations are seeking, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them all.
MAT 6:33 But first seek his kingdom and the righteousness that he requires, and then all these things will be added for you.
MAT 6:34 Therefore do not be anxious about tomorrow, for tomorrow will bring its own anxieties. Every day has trouble enough of its own.
MAT 7:1 ‘Do not judge and you will not be judged.
MAT 7:2 For, just as you judge others, you will yourselves be judged, and the standard that you use will be used for you.
MAT 7:3 Why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your friend’s eye, while you pay no attention at all to the plank of wood in yours?
MAT 7:4 How will you say to your friend “Let me take out the speck from your eye,” when all the time there is a plank in your own?
MAT 7:5 Hypocrite! Take out the plank from your own eye first, and then you will see clearly how to take out the speck from your friend’s.
MAT 7:6 ‘Do not give what is sacred to dogs; they will turn and maul you. Do not throw your pearls before pigs; they will trample them underfoot.
MAT 7:7 Ask, and it will be given to you; search, and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened to you.
MAT 7:8 For the person who asks receives, the person who searches finds, and the door will be opened to the person who knocks.
MAT 7:9 Who among you, when their child asks them for bread, will give them a stone,
MAT 7:10 or when they ask for a fish, will give them a snake?
MAT 7:11 If you, then, wicked though you are, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give what is good to those who ask him!
MAT 7:12 ‘Do to others whatever you would wish them to do to you; for that is the teaching of both the Law and the prophets.
MAT 7:13 Go in by the small gate. The road that leads to destruction is broad and spacious, and many go in by it.
MAT 7:14 For the gate is small, and the road narrow, that leads to life, and there are few who find it.
MAT 7:15 ‘Beware of false teachers – people who come to you in the guise of sheep, but at heart they are ravenous wolves.
MAT 7:16 By the fruit of their lives you will know them. Do people pick grapes from thorn bushes, or figs from thistles?
MAT 7:17 So, too, every sound tree bears good fruit, while a worthless tree bears bad fruit.
MAT 7:18 A sound tree cannot produce bad fruit, nor can a worthless tree bear good fruit.
MAT 7:19 Every tree that fails to bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
MAT 7:20 So it is by the fruit of their lives that you will know such people.
MAT 7:21 Not everyone who says to me “Master! Master!” will enter the kingdom of heaven, but only he who does the will of my Father who is in heaven.
MAT 7:22 On that day many will say to me “Master, Master, was not it in your name that we taught, and in your name that we drove out demons, and in your name that we did many miracles?”
MAT 7:23 And then I will say to them plainly “I never knew you. Go from my presence, you who live in sin.”
MAT 7:24 ‘Everyone, therefore, who listens to this teaching of mine and acts on it may be compared to a prudent person, who built their house on the rock.
MAT 7:25 The rain poured down, the rivers rose, the winds blew and beat on that house, but it did not fall, for its foundations were on the rock.
MAT 7:26 Everyone who listens to this teaching of mine and does not act on it may be compared to a foolish person, who built their house on the sand.
MAT 7:27 The rain poured down, the rivers rose, the winds blew and struck against that house, and it fell with a great crash.’
MAT 7:28 By the time that Jesus had finished speaking, the crowd was filled with amazement at his teaching.
MAT 7:29 For he taught them like one who had authority, and not like their teachers of the Law.
MAT 8:1 When Jesus had come down from the hill, great crowds followed him.
MAT 8:2 He saw a leper who came up, and bowed to the ground before him, and said, ‘Master, if only you are willing, you are able to make me clean.’
MAT 8:3 Stretching out his hand, Jesus touched him, saying as he did so, ‘I am willing; become clean.’ Instantly he was made clean from his leprosy;
MAT 8:4 and then Jesus said to him, ‘Be careful not to say a word to anyone, but go and show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift directed by Moses, as evidence of your cure.’
MAT 8:5 After Jesus had entered Capernaum, a centurion in the Roman army came up to him, entreating his help.
MAT 8:6 ‘Sir,’ he said, ‘my manservant is lying ill at my house with a stroke of paralysis, and is suffering terribly.’
MAT 8:7 ‘I will come and cure him,’ answered Jesus.
MAT 8:8 ‘Sir,’ the centurion went on, ‘I am unworthy to receive you under my roof; but only speak, and my manservant will be cured.
MAT 8:9 For I myself am a man under the orders of others, with soldiers under me; and, if I say to one of them “Go,” he goes, and to another “Come,” he comes, and to my slave “Do this,” he does it.’
MAT 8:10 Jesus was surprised to hear this, and said to those who were following him, ‘Never I tell you, in any Israelite have I met with such faith as this!
MAT 8:11 Yes, and many will come in from East and West and take their places beside Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven;
MAT 8:12 while the heirs to the kingdom will be banished into the darkness outside; there, there will be weeping and grinding of teeth.’
MAT 8:13 Then Jesus said to the centurion, ‘Go now, and it will be according to your faith.’ And the man was cured that very hour.
MAT 8:14 When Jesus went into Peter’s house, he saw Peter’s mother-in-law prostrated with fever.
MAT 8:15 On his taking her hand, the fever left her, and she rose and began to take care of him.
MAT 8:16 In the evening the people brought to Jesus many who were possessed by demons; and he drove out the spirits with a word, and cured all who were ill,
MAT 8:17 in fulfilment of these words in the prophet Isaiah – “He took our infirmities on himself, and bore the burden of our diseases.”
MAT 8:18 Seeing a crowd round him, Jesus gave orders to go across.
MAT 8:19 A teacher of the Law came up to him, and said, ‘Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.’
MAT 8:20 ‘Foxes have holes,’ answered Jesus, ‘and wild birds their nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.’
MAT 8:21 ‘Master,’ said another, who was a disciple, ‘let me first go and bury my father.’
MAT 8:22 But Jesus answered, ‘Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their dead.’
MAT 8:23 Then he got into the boat, followed by his disciples.
MAT 8:24 Suddenly so great a storm came up on the sea, that the waves broke right over the boat. But Jesus was asleep;
MAT 8:25 and the disciples came and roused him. ‘Master,’ they cried, ‘save us; we are lost!’
MAT 8:26 ‘Why are you so timid?’ he said. ‘You of little faith!’ Then Jesus rose and rebuked the winds and the sea, and a great calm followed.
MAT 8:27 The men were amazed, and exclaimed, ‘What kind of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him!’
MAT 8:28 On getting to the other side – the region of the Gadarenes – Jesus met two men who were possessed by demons, coming out of the tombs. They were so violent that no one was able to pass that way.
MAT 8:29 Suddenly they shrieked out, ‘What do you want with us, Son of God? Have you come here to torment us before our time?’
MAT 8:30 A long way off, there was a herd of many pigs, feeding;
MAT 8:31 and the foul spirits began begging Jesus, ‘If you drive us out, send us into the herd of pigs.’
MAT 8:32 ‘Go,’ he said. The spirits came out, and entered the pigs; and the whole herd rushed down the steep slope into the sea, and died in the water.
MAT 8:33 At this the men who tended them ran away and went to the town, carrying the news of all that had occurred, and of what had happened to the possessed men.
MAT 8:34 At the news the whole town went out to meet Jesus, and, when they saw him, they entreated him to go away from their region.
MAT 9:1 Afterwards Jesus got into a boat, and, crossing over, came to his own city.
MAT 9:2 There some people brought to him a paralysed man on a bed. When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the man, ‘Courage, child! Your sins are forgiven.’
MAT 9:3 Then some of the teachers of the Law said to themselves, ‘This man is blaspheming!’
MAT 9:4 Knowing their thoughts, Jesus exclaimed, ‘Why do you cherish such wicked thoughts?
MAT 9:5 Which, I ask, is the easier? – to say “Your sins are forgiven”? Or to say “Get up, and walk”?
MAT 9:6 But to show you that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins’ – then he said to the paralysed man – ‘Get up, take up your bed, and return to your home.’
MAT 9:7 The man got up and went to his home.
MAT 9:8 When the crowd saw this, they were awe-struck, and praised God for giving such power to human beings.
MAT 9:9 As Jesus went along, he saw a man, called Matthew, sitting in the tax office, and said to him, ‘Follow me.’ Matthew got up and followed him.
MAT 9:10 And, later on, when he was having dinner in the house, a number of tax collectors and outcasts came in and took their places at the table with Jesus and his disciples.
MAT 9:11 When the Pharisees saw this, they said to his disciples, ‘Why does your teacher eat in the company of tax collectors and outcasts?’
MAT 9:12 On hearing this, Jesus said, ‘It is not those who are healthy who need a doctor, but those who are ill.
MAT 9:13 Go and learn what this means – “I desire mercy, and not sacrifice”; for I did not come to call the religious, but the outcast.’
MAT 9:14 Then John’s disciples came to Jesus, and asked, ‘Why do we and the Pharisees fast while your disciples do not?’
MAT 9:15 Jesus answered, ‘Can the groom’s friends mourn as long as the groom is with them? But the days will come, when the groom will be taken away from them, and they will fast then.
MAT 9:16 Nobody ever puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment; for such a patch tears away from the garment, and a worse tear is made.
MAT 9:17 Nor do people put new wine into old wine-skins; for, if they do, the skins burst, and the wine runs out, and the skins are lost; but they put new wine into fresh skins, and so both are preserved.’
MAT 9:18 While Jesus was saying this, a synagogue leader came up and bowed to the ground before him. ‘My daughter,’ he said, ‘has just died; but come and place your hand on her, and she will be restored to life.’
MAT 9:19 So Jesus rose and followed him, and his disciples went also.
MAT 9:20 But meanwhile a woman, who had been suffering from haemorrhage for twelve years, came up behind and touched the tassel of his cloak.
MAT 9:21 ‘If I only touch his cloak,’ she said to herself, ‘I will get well.’
MAT 9:22 Turning and seeing her, Jesus said, ‘Courage, daughter! Your faith has delivered you.’ And at that very moment she became well.
MAT 9:23 When Jesus reached the leader’s house, seeing the flute players, and a number of people all in confusion,
MAT 9:24 he said, ‘Go away, the little girl is not dead; she is asleep.’ They began to laugh at him;
MAT 9:25 but, when the people had been sent out, Jesus went in, and took the little girl’s hand, and she rose.
MAT 9:26 The report of this spread through all that part of the country.
MAT 9:27 As Jesus was passing on from there, he was followed by two blind men, who kept calling out, ‘Take pity on us, Son of David!’
MAT 9:28 When he had gone indoors, the blind men came up to him; and Jesus asked them, ‘Do you believe that I am able to do this?’ ‘Yes, Master!’ they answered.
MAT 9:29 Then he touched their eyes, and said, ‘It will be according to your faith.’
MAT 9:30 Then their eyes were opened. Jesus sternly cautioned them. ‘See that no one knows of it,’ he said.
MAT 9:31 But the men went out, and spread the news about him through all that part of the country.
MAT 9:32 Just as they were going out, some people brought up to Jesus a dumb man who was possessed by a demon;
MAT 9:33 and, as soon as the demon had been driven out, the dumb man spoke. The people were astonished at this, and exclaimed, ‘Nothing like this has ever been seen in Israel!’
MAT 9:34 But the Pharisees said, ‘He drives out the demons by the help of the chief of the demons.’
MAT 9:35 Jesus went round all the towns and the villages, teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom, and curing every kind of disease and every kind of sickness.
MAT 9:36 But, when he saw the crowds, his heart was moved with compassion for them, because they were distressed and harassed, like sheep without a shepherd;
MAT 9:37 and he said to his disciples, ‘The harvest is abundant, but the labourers are few.
MAT 9:38 Therefore pray to the owner of the harvest to send labourers to gather in his harvest.’
MAT 10:1 Calling his twelve Disciples to him, Jesus gave them authority over foul spirits, so that they could drive them out, as well as the power of curing every kind of disease and every kind of sickness.
MAT 10:2 The names of the twelve apostles are these, First Simon, also known as Peter, and his brother Andrew; James the son of Zebedee, and his brother John;
MAT 10:3 Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the tax-gatherer; James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus;
MAT 10:4 Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot – the apostle who betrayed him.
MAT 10:5 These twelve Jesus sent out as his messengers, after giving them these instructions – ‘Do not go to the Gentiles, nor enter any Samaritan town,
MAT 10:6 but make your way rather to the lost sheep of Israel.
MAT 10:7 On your way proclaim that the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
MAT 10:8 Cure the sick, raise the dead, make the lepers clean, drive out demons. You have received free of cost, give free of cost.
MAT 10:9 Do not provide yourselves with gold, or silver, or coins in your purses;
MAT 10:10 not even with a bag for the journey, or a change of clothes, or sandals, or even a staff; for the worker is worth his food.
MAT 10:11 Whatever town or village you visit, find out who is worthy in that place, and remain there until you leave.
MAT 10:12 As you enter the house, greet it.
MAT 10:13 Then, if the house is worthy, let your blessing rest on it, but, if it is unworthy, let your blessing return on yourselves.
MAT 10:14 If no one welcomes you, or listens to what you say, as you leave that house or that town, shake off its dust from your feet.
MAT 10:15 I tell you, the doom of the land of Sodom and Gomorrah will be more bearable in the day of judgment than the doom of that town.
MAT 10:16 ‘Remember, I am sending you out as my messengers like sheep among wolves. So be as wise as snakes, and as blameless as doves.
MAT 10:17 Be on your guard against others, for they will betray you to courts of law, and scourge you in their synagogues;
MAT 10:18 and you will be brought before governors and kings for my sake so that you may witness for me before them and the nations.
MAT 10:19 Whenever they betray you, do not be anxious as to how you will speak or what you will say, for what you will say will be given you at the moment;
MAT 10:20 for it will not be you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaks within you.
MAT 10:21 Brother will betray brother to death, and the father his child; and children will turn against their parents, and cause them to be put to death;
MAT 10:22 and you will be hated by everyone because of me. Yet the person who endures to the end will be saved.
MAT 10:23 But, when they persecute you in one town, escape to the next; for, I tell you, you will not have come to the end of the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes.
MAT 10:24 A student is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his master.
MAT 10:25 It is enough for a student to be treated like his teacher, and a servant like his master. If the head of the house has been called Beelzebul, how much more the members of his household!
MAT 10:26 Do not, therefore, be afraid of them. There is nothing concealed which will not be revealed, nor anything hidden which will not become known.
MAT 10:27 What I tell you in the dark, say again in the light; and what is whispered in your ear, proclaim on the housetops.
MAT 10:28 Do not be afraid of those who kill the body, but are unable to kill the soul; rather be afraid of him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Gehenna.
MAT 10:29 Are not two sparrows sold for a one copper coin? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground without your Father’s knowledge.
MAT 10:30 While as for you, even the hairs of your head are numbered.
MAT 10:31 Do not, therefore, be afraid; you are of more value than many sparrows.
MAT 10:32 Everyone, therefore, who will publicly acknowledge me, I, too, will acknowledge before my Father who is in heaven;
MAT 10:33 but, if anyone publicly disowns me, I, too, will disown him before my Father who is in heaven.
MAT 10:34 ‘Do not imagine that I have come to bring peace to the earth. I have come to bring, not peace, but the sword.
MAT 10:35 For I have come to set a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
MAT 10:36 A person’s enemies will be the members of their own household.
MAT 10:37 Anyone who loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and anyone who loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
MAT 10:38 Anyone who does not take their cross and follow in my steps is not worthy of me.
MAT 10:39 The person who has found their life will lose it, while the person who, for my sake, has lost their life will find it.
MAT 10:40 ‘Anyone who welcomes you is welcoming me; and anyone who welcomes me is welcoming him who sent me as his messenger.
MAT 10:41 The person who welcomes a prophet, because they are a prophet, will receive a prophet’s reward; and anyone who welcomes a good person, because they are a good person, will receive a good person’s reward.
MAT 10:42 And, if anyone gives but a cup of cold water to one of these little ones because they are a disciple, I tell you that they will assuredly not lose their reward.’
MAT 11:1 After Jesus had finished giving directions to his twelve Disciples, he left that place in order to teach and preach in their towns.
MAT 11:2 Now John had heard in prison what the Christ was doing, and he sent a message by his disciples,
MAT 11:3 and asked – ‘Are you “the coming one,” or are we to look for someone else?’
MAT 11:4 The answer of Jesus to the question was – ‘Go and report to John what you hear and see –
MAT 11:5 the blind recover their sight and the lame walk, the lepers are made clean and the deaf hear, the dead, too, are raised to life, and the good news is told to the poor.
MAT 11:6 Blessed is the person who finds no hindrance in me.’
MAT 11:7 While John’s disciples were going back, Jesus began to say to the crowds with reference to John,
MAT 11:8 ‘What did you go out into the wilderness to look at? A reed waving in the wind? If not, what did you go out to see? A man richly dressed? Why, those who wear rich things are to be found in the courts of kings!
MAT 11:9 What, then, did you go for? To see a prophet? Yes, I tell you, and far more than a prophet.
MAT 11:10 This is the man of whom scripture says – “I am sending my messenger ahead of you, and he will prepare your way before you.”
MAT 11:11 I tell you, no one born of a woman has yet appeared who is greater than John the Baptist; and yet the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
MAT 11:12 From the time of John the Baptist to this very hour, the kingdom of heaven has been taken by force, and people using force have been seizing it.
MAT 11:13 For the teaching of all the prophets and of the Law continued until the time of John;
MAT 11:14 and – if you are ready to accept it – John is himself the Elijah who was destined to come.
MAT 11:15 If you have ears, listen.
MAT 11:16 But to what will I compare the present generation? It is like little children sitting in the market-places and calling out to their playmates –
MAT 11:17 We have played the flute for you, but you have not danced; We have wailed, but you have not mourned.
MAT 11:18 For, when John came, neither eating nor drinking, people said “He has a demon in him”;
MAT 11:19 and now that the Son of Man has come, eating and drinking, they are saying “Here is a glutton and a wine-drinker, a friend of tax collectors and outcasts!” And yet wisdom is vindicated by her actions.’
MAT 11:20 Then Jesus began to reproach the towns in which most of his miracles had been done, because they had not repented,
MAT 11:21 ‘Alas for you, Chorazin! Alas for you, Bethsaida! For, if the miracles which were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
MAT 11:22 Yet, I tell you, the doom of Tyre and Sidon will be more bearable in the day of judgment than yours.
MAT 11:23 And you, Capernaum! Will you exalt yourself to heaven? You will be flung down to Hades! For, if the miracles which have been done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have been standing to this day.
MAT 11:24 Yet, I tell you, the doom of Sodom will be more bearable in the day of judgment than yours.’
MAT 11:25 At that same time Jesus uttered the words, ‘I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that, though you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, you have revealed them to the childlike!
MAT 11:26 Yes, Father, I thank you that this has seemed good to you.
MAT 11:27 Everything has been committed to me by my Father; nor does anyone fully know the Son, except the Father, or fully know the Father, except the Son and those to whom the Son may choose to reveal him.
MAT 11:28 Come to me, all you who toil and are burdened, and I will give you rest!
MAT 11:29 Take my yoke on you, and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble, and you will find rest for your souls;
MAT 11:30 for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.’
MAT 12:1 About the same time Jesus walked through the cornfields one Sabbath. His disciples were hungry, and began to pick some ears of wheat and eat them.
MAT 12:2 But, when the Pharisees saw this, they said, ‘Look! Your disciples are doing what it is not allowable to do on a Sabbath!’
MAT 12:3 ‘Haven’t you read,’ replied Jesus, ‘what David did, when he and his companions were hungry –
MAT 12:4 how he went into the house of God, and how they ate the consecrated bread, though it was not allowable for him or his companions to eat it, but only for the priests?
MAT 12:5 And haven’t you read in the law that, on the Sabbath, the priest in the Temple break the Sabbath and yet are not guilty?
MAT 12:6 Here, however, I tell you, there is something greater than the Temple!
MAT 12:7 Had you learned the meaning of the words – “I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,” you would not have condemned those who are not guilty.
MAT 12:8 For the Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.’
MAT 12:9 Passing on, Jesus went into their synagogue,
MAT 12:10 and there he saw a man with a withered hand. Some people asked Jesus whether it was allowable to work a cure on the Sabbath – so that they might have a charge to bring against him.
MAT 12:11 But Jesus said to them, ‘Which of you, if he had only one sheep, and that sheep fell into a pit on the Sabbath, would not lay hold of it and pull it out?
MAT 12:12 How much more precious a person is than a sheep! Therefore it is allowable to do good on the Sabbath.’
MAT 12:13 Then he said to the man. ‘Stretch out your hand.’ The man stretched it out; and it had become as sound as the other.
MAT 12:14 On coming out, the Pharisees plotted against Jesus, to put him to death.
MAT 12:15 Jesus, however, became aware of it, and went away from that place. A number of people followed him, and he cured them all;
MAT 12:16 but he warned them not to make him known,
MAT 12:17 in fulfilment of these words in the prophet Isaiah –
MAT 12:18 “Here is my chosen servant, who I love and who pleases me! I will breathe my spirit on him, and he will announce a time of judgment to the Gentiles.
MAT 12:19 He will not contend, nor cry aloud, Neither will anyone hear his voice in the streets;
MAT 12:20 a bruised reed he will not break, and a smouldering wick he will not quench, until he has brought the judgment to a victorious issue,
MAT 12:21 and on his name will the Gentiles rest their hopes.”
MAT 12:22 Then some people brought to Jesus a possessed man, who was blind and dumb; and he cured him, so that the man who had been dumb both talked and saw.
MAT 12:23 At this all the people were astounded. ‘Is it possible that this is the son of David?’ they exclaimed.
MAT 12:24 But the Pharisees heard of it and said, ‘He drives out demons only by the help of Beelzebul the chief of the demons.’
MAT 12:25 Jesus, however, was aware of what was passing in their minds, and said to them, ‘Any kingdom divided against itself becomes a desolation, and any town or household divided against itself will not last.
MAT 12:26 So, if Satan drives Satan out, he must be divided against himself; and how, then, can his kingdom last?
MAT 12:27 And, if it is by Beelzebul’s help that I drive out demons, by whose help is it that your own sons drive them out? Therefore they will themselves be your judges.
MAT 12:28 But, if it is by the help of the Spirit of God that I drive out demons, then the kingdom of God must already be upon you.
MAT 12:29 How, again, can anyone get into a strong man’s house and carry off his goods, without first securing him? Not until then will he plunder his house.
MAT 12:30 Anyone who is not with me is against me, and the person who does not help me to gather is scattering.
MAT 12:31 Therefore, I tell you, people will be forgiven every sin and slander; but slander against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.
MAT 12:32 Whoever speaks against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, either in the present age, or in the age to come.
MAT 12:33 ‘You must assume either that both tree and fruit are good, or that both tree and fruit are worthless; since it is by its fruits that a tree is known.
MAT 12:34 You children of snakes! How can you, evil as you are, say anything good? For what fills the heart will rise to the lips.
MAT 12:35 A good person, from his good stores, produces good things; while an evil person, from his evil stores, produces evil things.
MAT 12:36 I tell you that for every careless thing that people say, they must answer on the “day of judgment.”
MAT 12:37 For it is by your words that you will be acquitted, and by your words that you will be condemned.’
MAT 12:38 At this point, some teachers of the Law and Pharisees spoke up. ‘Teacher,’ they said, ‘we want to see some sign from you.’
MAT 12:39 ‘It is a wicked and unfaithful generation,’ answered Jesus, ‘that is asking for a sign, and no sign will be given it except the sign of the prophet Jonah.
MAT 12:40 For, just as Jonah was inside the sea-monster three days and three nights, so will the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
MAT 12:41 At the judgment, the people of Nineveh will stand up with this generation, and will condemn it, because they repented at Jonah’s proclamation; and here is more than a Jonah!
MAT 12:42 At the judgment the Queen of the South will rise up with the present generation, and will condemn it, because she came from the ends of the earth to listen to the wisdom of Solomon; and here is more than a Solomon!
MAT 12:43 No sooner does a foul spirit leave a person, than it passes through places where there is no water, in search of rest, and does not find it.
MAT 12:44 Then it says “I will go back to the home which I left”; but, on coming there, it finds it unoccupied, and swept, and put in order.
MAT 12:45 Then it goes and brings with it seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and they go in, and make their home there; and the last state of that man proves to be worse than the first. So, too, will it be with this wicked generation.’
MAT 12:46 While he was still speaking to the crowds, his mother and brothers were standing outside, asking to speak to him.
MAT 12:47 Someone told him this, and Jesus replied,
MAT 12:48 ‘Who is my mother? And who are my brothers?’
MAT 12:49 Then, stretching out his hands towards his disciples, he said, ‘Here are my mother and my brothers!
MAT 12:50 For anyone who does the will of my Father who is in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.’
MAT 13:1 That same day, when Jesus had left the house and was sitting by the sea,
MAT 13:2 such great crowds gathered round him, that he got into a boat, and sat in it, while all the people stood on the beach.
MAT 13:3 Then he told them many truths in parables. ‘The sower,’ he began, ‘went out to sow; and,
MAT 13:4 as they were sowing, some seed fell along the path, and the birds came and ate it up.
MAT 13:5 Some fell on rocky places, where it had not much soil, and, because the soil wasn’t deep, sprang up at once.
MAT 13:6 As soon as the sun had risen, it was scorched, and, because their roots were not deep enough, withered away.
MAT 13:7 Some, again, fell into the brambles; but the brambles shot up and choked it.
MAT 13:8 Some, however, fell on good soil, and yielded a return, sometimes one hundred, sometimes sixty, sometimes thirty fold.
MAT 13:9 Let those who have ears hear.’
MAT 13:10 Afterwards his disciples came to him, and said, ‘Why do you speak to them in parables?’
MAT 13:11 ‘To you,’ answered Jesus, ‘the knowledge of the hidden truths of the kingdom of heaven has been imparted, but not to those.
MAT 13:12 For, to all who have, more will be given, and they will have abundance; but, from all who have nothing, even what they have will be taken away.
MAT 13:13 That is why I speak to them in parables, because, though they have eyes, they do not see, and though they have ears, they do not hear or understand.
MAT 13:14 In them is being fulfilled that prophecy of Isaiah which says – “You will hear with your ears without ever understanding, and, though you have eyes, you will see without ever perceiving,
MAT 13:15 for the mind of this nation has grown dense, and their ears are dull of hearing, their eyes also have they closed; otherwise some day they might perceive with their eyes, and with their ears they might hear, and in their mind they might understand, and might turn – and I might heal them.”
MAT 13:16 ‘But blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear;
MAT 13:17 for I tell you that many prophets and good people have longed for the sight of the things which you are seeing, yet never saw them, and to hear the things which you are hearing, yet never heard them.
MAT 13:18 ‘Listen, then, yourselves to the parable of the sower.
MAT 13:19 When anyone hears the message of the kingdom without understanding it, the evil one comes and snatches away what has been sown in their mind. This is the person meant by the seed which was sown along the path.
MAT 13:20 By the seed which was sown on rocky places is meant the person who hears the message, and at once accepts it joyfully;
MAT 13:21 but, as they have no root, they stand for only a short time; and, when trouble or persecution arises because of the message, they fall away at once.
MAT 13:22 By the seed which was sown among the brambles is meant the person who hears the message, but the cares of life and the glamour of wealth completely choke the message, so that it gives no return.
MAT 13:23 But by the seed which was sown on the good ground is meant the person who hears the message and understands it, and really yields a return, sometimes one hundred, sometimes sixty, sometimes thirty fold.’
MAT 13:24 Another parable which Jesus told them was this – ‘The kingdom of heaven is compared to a person who sowed good seed in their field.
MAT 13:25 But, while everyone was asleep, their enemy came and sowed weeds among the wheat, and then went away.
MAT 13:26 So, when the blades of corn shot up, and came into ear, the weeds made their appearance also.
MAT 13:27 The owner’s servants came to them, and said “Was not it good seed that you sowed in your field? Where, then, do the weeds in it come from?”
MAT 13:28 “An enemy has done this,” was the owner’s answer. “Do you wish us, then,” they asked, “to go and gather them together?”
MAT 13:29 “No,” said he, “because while you are pulling up the weeds you might uproot the wheat with them.
MAT 13:30 Let both grow side by side until harvest; and then I will say to the reapers, Gather the weeds together first, and tie them in bundles for burning; but bring all the wheat into my barn.”’
MAT 13:31 Another parable which he told them was this – ‘The kingdom of heaven is like a mustard seed, which a person took and sowed in his field.
MAT 13:32 This seed is smaller than all other seeds, but, when it has grown up, it is larger than the herbs and becomes a tree, so that “the wild birds come and roost in its branches.”’
MAT 13:33 This was another parable which Jesus related – ‘The kingdom of heaven is like some yeast which a woman took and covered up in three pecks of flour, until the whole had risen.’
MAT 13:34 Of all this Jesus spoke to the crowd in parables; indeed to them he used never to speak at all except in parables,
MAT 13:35 in fulfilment of these words in the prophet – “I will speak to them in parables; I will utter things kept secret since the foundation of the world.”
MAT 13:36 Then Jesus left the crowd, and went into the house. Presently his disciples came to him, and said, ‘Explain to us the parable of the weeds in the field.’
MAT 13:37 He answered, ‘The sower of the good seed is the Son of Man.
MAT 13:38 The field is the world. By the good seed is meant the people of the kingdom. The weeds are the wicked,
MAT 13:39 and the enemy who sowed them is the devil. The harvest time is the close of the age, and the reapers are angels.
MAT 13:40 And, just as the weeds are gathered and burnt, so it will be at the close of the age.
MAT 13:41 The Son of Man will send his angels, and they will gather from his kingdom all that hinders and those who live in sin,
MAT 13:42 and will throw them into the blazing furnace, where there will be weeping and grinding of teeth.
MAT 13:43 Then will the righteous shine, like the sun, in the kingdom of their Father. If you have ears, listen.
MAT 13:44 ‘The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hidden in a field, which a person found and hid again, and then, in their delight, went and sold everything that they had, and bought that field.
MAT 13:45 ‘Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant in search of choice pearls.
MAT 13:46 Finding one of great value, they went and sold everything that they had, and bought it.
MAT 13:47 Or again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net which was cast into the sea, and caught fish of all kinds.
MAT 13:48 When it was full, they hauled it up on the beach, and sat down and sorted the good fish into baskets, but threw the worthless ones away.
MAT 13:49 So will it be at the close of the age. The angels will go out and separate the wicked from the righteous,
MAT 13:50 and will throw them into the blazing furnace, where there will be weeping and grinding of teeth.
MAT 13:51 ‘Have you understood all this?’ Jesus asked. ‘Yes,’ they answered.
MAT 13:52 Then he added, ‘So every teacher of the Law, who has received instruction about the kingdom of heaven, is like a householder who produces from his stores things both new and old.’
MAT 13:53 When Jesus had finished these parables, he withdrew from that place.
MAT 13:54 Going to his own part of the country, he taught the people in their synagogue in such a manner that they were deeply impressed. ‘Where did he get this wisdom?’ they said, ‘and the miracles?
MAT 13:55 Isn’t he the carpenter’s son? Isn’t his mother called Mary, and his brothers James, and Joseph, and Simon, and Judas?
MAT 13:56 And his sisters, too – are not they all living among us? Where, then did he get all this?’
MAT 13:57 These things proved a hindrance to their believing in him. But Jesus said, ‘A prophet is not without honour, except in his own country and in his own house.’
MAT 13:58 He did not work many miracles there, because of their want of faith.
MAT 14:1 At that time Prince Herod heard of the fame of Jesus,
MAT 14:2 and said to his attendants, ‘This must be John the Baptist; he must be risen from the dead, and that is why these miraculous powers are active in him.’
MAT 14:3 For Herod had arrested John, put him in chains, and shut him up in prison, to please Herodias, the wife of Herod’s brother Philip.
MAT 14:4 For John had said to him “You have no right to be living with her.”
MAT 14:5 Yet, though Herod wanted to put him to death, he was afraid of the people, because they looked on John as a prophet.
MAT 14:6 But, when Herod’s birthday came, the daughter of Herodias danced before his guests, and so pleased Herod,
MAT 14:7 that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she asked.
MAT 14:8 Prompted by her mother, the girl said “Give me here, on a dish, the head of John the Baptist.”
MAT 14:9 The king was distressed at this; yet, because of his oath and of the guests at his table, he ordered it to be given her.
MAT 14:10 He had John beheaded in the prison
MAT 14:11 and his head was brought on a dish and given to the girl, and she took it to her mother.
MAT 14:12 Then John’s disciples came, and took the body away, and buried it; and went and told Jesus.
MAT 14:13 When Jesus heard of it, he left privately in a boat to a lonely spot. The people, however, heard of his going, and followed him in crowds from the towns on foot.
MAT 14:14 On getting out of the boat, Jesus saw a great crowd, and his heart was moved at the sight of them; and he cured all the sick among them.
MAT 14:15 In the evening the disciples came up to him, and said, ‘This is a lonely spot, and the day is now far advanced; send the crowds away so that they can go to the villages, and buy themselves food.’
MAT 14:16 But Jesus said, ‘They need not go away, it is for you to give them something to eat.’
MAT 14:17 ‘We have nothing here,’ they said, ‘except five loaves and two fish.’
MAT 14:18 ‘Bring them here to me,’ was his reply.
MAT 14:19 Jesus ordered the people to take their seats on the grass; and, taking the five loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven, and said the blessing, and, after he had broken the loaves, gave them to his disciples; and they gave them to the crowds.
MAT 14:20 Everyone had sufficient to eat, and they picked up enough of the broken pieces that were left to fill twelve baskets.
MAT 14:21 The men who ate were about five thousand in number, without counting women and children.
MAT 14:22 Immediately afterwards Jesus made the disciples get into a boat and cross over in advance of him, while he dismissed the crowds.
MAT 14:23 After dismissing the crowds, he went up the hill by himself to pray; and, when evening fell, he was there alone.
MAT 14:24 The boat was by this time some miles from shore, labouring in the waves, for the wind was against her.
MAT 14:25 Three hours after midnight, however, Jesus came towards the disciples, walking on the water.
MAT 14:26 But, when they saw him walking on the water, they were terrified. ‘It is a ghost,’ they exclaimed, and cried out in fear.
MAT 14:27 But Jesus at once spoke to them. ‘Courage!’ he said, ‘It is I; do not be afraid!’
MAT 14:28 ‘Master,’ Peter exclaimed, ‘if it is you, tell me to come to you on the water.’
MAT 14:29 Jesus said, ‘Come.’ So Peter got down from the boat, and walked on the water, and went towards Jesus;
MAT 14:30 but, when he felt the wind, he was frightened, and, beginning to sink, cried out, ‘Master! Save me!’
MAT 14:31 Instantly Jesus stretched out his hand, and caught hold of him. ‘You of little faith!’ he said, ‘Why did you falter?’
MAT 14:32 When they had got into the boat, the wind dropped.
MAT 14:33 But the men in the boat threw themselves on their faces before him, and said, ‘You are indeed God’s Son.’
MAT 14:34 When they had crossed over, they landed at Gennesaret.
MAT 14:35 But the people of that place, recognising Jesus, sent out to the whole country round, and brought to him all who were ill,
MAT 14:36 begging him merely to let them touch the tassel of his cloak; and all who touched were made perfectly well.
MAT 15:1 Then some Pharisees and teachers of the Law came to Jesus, and said,
MAT 15:2 ‘How is it that your disciples break the traditions of our ancestors? For they do not wash their hands when they eat food.’
MAT 15:3 His reply was, ‘How is it that you on your side break God’s commandments out of respect for your own traditions?
MAT 15:4 For God said – “Honour your father and mother,” and “Anyone who abuses his father or mother must suffer death,”
MAT 15:5 but you say “Whenever anyone says to his father or mother ‘Whatever of mine might have been of service to you is set apart for God,’
MAT 15:6 he is in no way bound to honour his father.” In this way you have nullified the words of God for the sake of your traditions.
MAT 15:7 Hypocrites! It was well said by Isaiah when he prophesied about you –
MAT 15:8 “This is a people that honour me with their lips, While their hearts are far removed from me;
MAT 15:9 but vainly do they worship me, For they teach but human precepts.”’
MAT 15:10 Then Jesus called the people to him, and said, ‘Listen, and mark my words.
MAT 15:11 It is not what enters a person’s mouth that defiles them, but what comes out from their mouth – that does defile them!’
MAT 15:12 His disciples came up to him, and said, ‘Do you know that the Pharisees were shocked on hearing what you said?’
MAT 15:13 ‘Every plant,’ Jesus replied, ‘that my heavenly Father has not planted will be rooted up.
MAT 15:14 Leave them be; they are but blind guides; and, if one blind person guides another, both of them will fall into a ditch.’
MAT 15:15 Peter spoke up, ‘Explain this saying to us.’
MAT 15:16 ‘What, do even you understand nothing yet?’ Jesus exclaimed.
MAT 15:17 ‘Don’t you see that whatever goes into the mouth passes into the stomach, and is afterwards expelled?
MAT 15:18 But the things that come out of the mouth proceed from the heart, and it is these that defile a person;
MAT 15:19 for out of the heart proceed evil thoughts – murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, perjury, slander.
MAT 15:20 These are the things that defile a person; but eating with unwashed hands does not defile a person.’
MAT 15:21 On going away from that place, Jesus went to the country round Tyre and Sidon.
MAT 15:22 There, a Canaanite woman of that district came out and began calling to Jesus, ‘Take pity on me, Master, Son of David; my daughter is grievously possessed by a demon.’
MAT 15:23 But Jesus did not answer her a word; and his disciples came up and begged him to send her away. ‘She keeps calling out after us,’ they said.
MAT 15:24 ‘I was not sent,’ replied Jesus, ‘to anyone except the lost sheep of Israel.’
MAT 15:25 But the woman came, and, bowing to the ground before him, said, ‘Master, help me.’
MAT 15:26 ‘It is not fair,’ replied Jesus, ‘to take the children’s food and throw it to dogs.’
MAT 15:27 ‘Yes, Master,’ she said, ‘for even dogs do feed on the scraps that fall from their owners’ table.’
MAT 15:28 ‘Your faith is great,’ was his reply to the woman, ‘it will be as you wish!’ And her daughter was cured that very hour.
MAT 15:29 On leaving that place, Jesus went to the shore of the Sea of Galilee; and then went up the hill, and sat down.
MAT 15:30 Great crowds of people came to him, bringing with them those who were lame, crippled, blind, or dumb, and many others. They put them down at his feet, and he cured them;
MAT 15:31 and the crowds were astonished, when they saw the dumb talking, the cripples made sound, the lame walking about, and the blind with their sight restored; and they praised the God of Israel.
MAT 15:32 Afterwards Jesus called his disciples to him, and said, ‘My heart is moved at the sight of all these people, for they have already been with me three days and they have nothing to eat; and I am unwilling to send them away hungry; they might faint on the way home.’
MAT 15:33 ‘Where can we,’ his disciples asked, ‘in a lonely place find enough bread for such a crowd as this?’
MAT 15:34 ‘How many loaves have you?’ said Jesus. ‘Seven,’ they answered, ‘and a few small fish.’
MAT 15:35 Telling the crowd to sit down on the ground,
MAT 15:36 Jesus took the seven loaves and the fish, and, after saying the thanksgiving, broke them, and gave them to the disciples; and the disciples gave them to the crowds.
MAT 15:37 Everyone had sufficient to eat, and they picked up seven baskets full of the broken pieces left.
MAT 15:38 The men who ate were four thousand in number without counting women and children.
MAT 15:39 Then, after dismissing the crowds, Jesus got into the boat, and went to the region of Magadan.
MAT 16:1 Here the Pharisees and Sadducees came up, and, to test Jesus, requested him to show them some sign from the heavens.
MAT 16:2 But Jesus answered, ‘In the evening you say “It will be fine weather, for the sky is as red as fire.”
MAT 16:3 But in the morning you say “Today it will be stormy, for the sky is as red as fire and threatening.” You learn to read the sky; yet you are unable to read the signs of the times!
MAT 16:4 A wicked and unfaithful generation is asking for a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Jonah.’ So he left them and went away.
MAT 16:5 Now the disciples had crossed to the opposite shore, and had forgotten to take any bread.
MAT 16:6 Presently Jesus said to them, ‘Take care and be on your guard against the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.’
MAT 16:7 But the disciples began talking among themselves about their having brought no bread.
MAT 16:8 On noticing this, Jesus said, ‘Why are you talking among yourselves about your being short of bread, you of little faith?
MAT 16:9 Don’t you yet see, nor remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many baskets you took away?
MAT 16:10 Nor yet the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many basketfuls you took away?
MAT 16:11 How is it that you do not see that I was not speaking about bread? Be on your guard against the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.’
MAT 16:12 Then they understood that he had told them to be on their guard, not against the leaven of bread, but against the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
MAT 16:13 On coming into the region of Caesarea Philippi, Jesus asked his disciples this question – ‘Who do people say that the Son of Man is?’
MAT 16:14 ‘Some say John the Baptist,’ they answered, ‘Others, however, say that he is Elijah, while others again say Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.’
MAT 16:15 ‘But you,’ he said, ‘who do you say that I am?’
MAT 16:16 To this Simon Peter answered, ‘You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.’
MAT 16:17 ‘Blessed are you, Simon, Son of Jonah,’ Jesus replied. ‘For no human being has revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven.
MAT 16:18 Yes, and I say to you, your name is “Peter” – a Rock, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades will not prevail over it.
MAT 16:19 I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Whatever you forbid on earth will be held in heaven to be forbidden, and whatever you allow on earth will be held in heaven to be allowed.’
MAT 16:20 Then he charged his disciples not to tell anyone that he was the Christ.
MAT 16:21 At that time Jesus Christ began to explain to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem, and undergo much suffering at the hands of the elders, and chief priests, and teachers of the Law, and be put to death, and rise on the third day.
MAT 16:22 But Peter took Jesus aside, and began to rebuke him. ‘Master,’ he said, ‘please God that will never be your fate!’
MAT 16:23 Jesus, however, turning to Peter, said, ‘Out of my way, Satan! You are a hindrance to me; for you look at things, not as God does, but as a person does.’
MAT 16:24 Then Jesus said to his disciples, ‘If anyone wishes to walk in my steps, they must renounce self, and take up their cross, and follow me.
MAT 16:25 For whoever wishes to save his life will lose it, and whoever, for my sake, loses his life will find it.
MAT 16:26 What good will it do a person to gain the whole world, if he forfeits his life? Or what will a person give that is of equal value with his life?
MAT 16:27 For the Son of Man is to come in his Father’s glory, with his angels, and then he will give to everyone what his actions deserve.
MAT 16:28 I tell you, some of those who are standing here will not know death until they have seen the Son of Man coming into his kingdom.’
MAT 17:1 Six days later, Jesus took with him Peter, and the brothers James and John, and led them up a high mountain alone.
MAT 17:2 There his appearance was transformed before their eyes; his face shone like the sun, and his clothes became as white as the light.
MAT 17:3 All at once Moses and Elijah appeared to them, talking with Jesus.
MAT 17:4 ‘Master,’ exclaimed Peter, interposing, ‘it is good to be here; if you wish, I will make three tents here, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.’
MAT 17:5 While he was still speaking, a bright cloud enveloped them, and there was a voice from the cloud that said – ‘This is my dearly loved son, who brings me great joy; listen to him.’
MAT 17:6 The disciples, on hearing this, fell on their faces, greatly afraid.
MAT 17:7 But Jesus came and touched them, saying as he did so, ‘Rise up, and do not be afraid.’
MAT 17:8 When they raised their eyes, they saw no one but Jesus himself alone.
MAT 17:9 As they were going down the mountain side, Jesus gave them this warning – ‘Do not speak of this vision to anyone, until the Son of Man has risen from the dead.’
MAT 17:10 ‘How is it,’ his disciples asked, ‘that our teachers of the Law say that Elijah has to come first?’
MAT 17:11 ‘Elijah indeed does come,’ Jesus replied, ‘and will restore everything;
MAT 17:12 and I tell you that Elijah has already come, and people have not recognised him, but have treated him just as they pleased. In the same way, too, the Son of Man is destined to undergo suffering at people’s hands.’
MAT 17:13 Then the disciples understood that he had spoken to them about John the Baptist.
MAT 17:14 When they came to the crowd, a man came up to Jesus, and, kneeling down before him, said,
MAT 17:15 ‘Master, take pity on my son, for he is epileptic and suffers terribly; indeed, he often falls into the fire and into the water;
MAT 17:16 I brought him to your disciples, but they could not cure him.’
MAT 17:17 ‘Faithless and perverse generation!’ Jesus exclaimed, ‘how long must I be among you? How long must I have patience with you? Bring the boy here to me.’
MAT 17:18 Then Jesus rebuked the demon, and it came out of the boy; and he was cured from that very hour.
MAT 17:19 Afterwards the disciples came up to Jesus, and asked him privately, ‘Why was it that we could not drive it out?’
MAT 17:20 ‘Because you have so little faith!’ he answered, ‘For, I tell you, if your faith were only like a mustard seed, you could say to this mountain “Move from this place to that!” and it would be moved; and nothing would be impossible to you.’
MAT 17:21 
MAT 17:22 While Jesus and his disciples were together in Galilee, he said to them, ‘The Son of Man is destined to be betrayed into human hands,
MAT 17:23 and they will put him to death, but on the third day he will rise.’ The disciples were greatly distressed.
MAT 17:24 After they had reached Capernaum, the collectors of the Temple tax came up to Peter, and said, ‘Does not your Master pay the Temple tax?’
MAT 17:25 ‘Yes,’ answered Peter. But, on going into the house, before he could speak, Jesus said, ‘What do you think, Simon? From whom do earthly kings take taxes or tribute? From their sons, or from others?’
MAT 17:26 ‘From others,’ answered Peter. ‘Well then,’ continued Jesus, ‘their sons go free.
MAT 17:27 Still, so we don’t offend them, go and throw a line into the sea; take the first fish that rises, open its mouth, and you will find in it a piece of money. Take that, and give it to the collectors for both of us.’
MAT 18:1 On the same occasion the disciples came to Jesus, and asked him, ‘Who is really the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?’
MAT 18:2 Jesus called a little child to him, and placed it in the middle of them, and then said,
MAT 18:3 ‘I tell you, unless you change and become like little children, you will not enter the kingdom of heaven at all.
MAT 18:4 Therefore, anyone who will humble themselves like this child – that person will be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
MAT 18:5 And anyone who, for the sake of my name, welcomes even one little child like this, is welcoming me.
MAT 18:6 But, if anyone puts temptation in the way of one of these little ones who believe in me, it would be best for them to be sunk in the depths of the sea with a great millstone hung round their neck.
MAT 18:7 Alas for the world because of such temptations! There cannot but be temptations but sorrow awaits the person who does the tempting!
MAT 18:8 ‘If your hand or your foot causes you to sin, cut it off, and throw it away. It would be better for you to enter life maimed or lame, than to have both hands, or both feet, and be thrown into the fire that never goes out.
MAT 18:9 If your eye causes you to sin, take it out, and throw it away. It would be better for you to enter life with only one eye, than to have both eyes and be thrown into the fires of Gehenna.
MAT 18:10 Beware of despising one of these little ones, for in heaven, I tell you, their angels always see the face of my Father who is in heaven.
MAT 18:11 
MAT 18:12 ‘What think you? If a person owns a hundred sheep, and one of them strays, will the person not leave the ninety-nine on the hills, and go and search for the one that is straying?
MAT 18:13 And, if they succeed in finding it, I tell you that they rejoice more over that one sheep than over the ninety-nine which did not stray.
MAT 18:14 So, too, it is the will of my Father who is in heaven that not one of these little ones should be lost.
MAT 18:15 ‘If your brother or sister does wrong, go to them and convince them of their fault when you are both alone. If they listen to you, you have won them over.
MAT 18:16 But, if they do not listen to you, take with you one or two others, so that on the evidence of two or three witnesses, every word may be put beyond dispute.
MAT 18:17 If they refuse to listen to them, speak to the church; and, if they also refuse to listen to the church, treat him as you would a Gentile or a tax-gatherer.
MAT 18:18 ‘I tell you, all that you forbid on earth will be held in heaven to be forbidden, and all that you allow on earth will be held in heaven to be allowed.
MAT 18:19 Again, I tell you that, if but two of you on earth agree as to what they will pray for, whatever it be, it will be granted them by my Father who is in heaven.
MAT 18:20 For where two or three have come together in my name, I am present with them.’
MAT 18:21 Then Peter came up, and said to Jesus, ‘Master, how often am I to forgive someone who wrongs me? As many as seven times?’
MAT 18:22 But Jesus answered, ‘Not seven times, but seventy times seven.
MAT 18:23 Therefore the kingdom of heaven may be compared to a king who wished to settle accounts with his servants.
MAT 18:24 When he had begun to do so, one of them was brought to him who owed him ten thousand bags of gold;
MAT 18:25 and, as he could not pay, his master ordered him to be sold towards the payment of the debt, together with his wife, and his children, and everything that he had.
MAT 18:26 The servant threw himself down on the ground before him and said “Have patience with me, and I will pay you all.”
MAT 18:27 The master was moved with compassion; and he let him go, and forgave him the debt.
MAT 18:28 But, on going out, that same servant came upon one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred silver coins. Seizing him by the throat, he said “Pay what you owe me.”
MAT 18:29 His fellow servant threw himself on the ground and begged for mercy. “Have patience with me,” he said, “and I will pay you.”
MAT 18:30 But the other would not, but went and put him in prison until he should pay his debt.
MAT 18:31 When his fellow servants saw what had happened, they were greatly distressed, and went to their master and laid the whole matter before him.
MAT 18:32 So the master sent for the servant, and said to him “You wicked servant! When you begged me for mercy, I forgave you the whole of that debt.
MAT 18:33 Shouldn’t you, also, to have shown mercy to your fellow servant, just as I showed mercy to you?”
MAT 18:34 Then his master, in anger, handed him over to the jailers, until he should pay the whole of his debt.
MAT 18:35 So, also, will my heavenly Father do to you, unless each one of you forgives his brother or sister from your heart.’
MAT 19:1 At the conclusion of this teaching, Jesus withdrew from Galilee, and went into that district of Judea which is on the other side of the Jordan.
MAT 19:2 Great crowds followed him, and he cured them there.
MAT 19:3 Presently some Pharisees came up to him, and, to test him, said, ‘Has a man the right to divorce his wife for every cause?’
MAT 19:4 ‘Haven’t you read,’ replied Jesus, ‘that at the beginning the Creator “made them male and female,”
MAT 19:5 and said – “For this reason a man will leave his father and mother, and be united to his wife, and the man and his wife will become one”?
MAT 19:6 So that they are no longer two, but one. What God himself, then, has yoked together people must not separate.’
MAT 19:7 ‘Why, then,’ they said, ‘did Moses direct that a man should serve his wife with a notice of separation and divorce her?’
MAT 19:8 ‘Moses, owing to the hardness of your hearts,’ answered Jesus, ‘permitted you to divorce your wives, but that was not so at the beginning.
MAT 19:9 But I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except on the ground of some serious sexual sin, and marries another woman, is guilty of adultery.’
MAT 19:10 ‘If that,’ said the disciples, ‘is the position of a man with regard to his wife, it is better not to marry.’
MAT 19:11 ‘It is not everyone,’ replied Jesus, ‘who can accept this teaching, but only those who have been enabled to do so.
MAT 19:12 Some men are incapable of marriage because they were born that way, or have been made so by other people, while there are others who stay single for the sake of the kingdom of Heaven. Accept this if you can.’
MAT 19:13 Then some little children were brought to Jesus, for him to place his hands on them, and pray; but the disciples found fault with those who had brought them.
MAT 19:14 Jesus, however, said, ‘Let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for it is to the childlike that the kingdom of heaven belongs.’
MAT 19:15 So he placed his hands on them, and then went on his way.
MAT 19:16 A man came up to Jesus, and said, ‘Teacher, what good thing must I do to obtain eternal life?’
MAT 19:17 ‘Why ask me about goodness?’ answered Jesus. ‘There is only one who is good. If you want to enter life, keep the commandments.’
MAT 19:18 ‘What commandments?’ asked the man. ‘These,’ answered Jesus, – ‘“You must not kill. You must not commit adultery. You must not steal. You must not say what is false about others.
MAT 19:19 Honour your father and your mother.” And “You must love your neighbour as you love yourself.”’
MAT 19:20 ‘I have observed all these,’ said the young man. ‘What is still wanting in me?’
MAT 19:21 ‘If you wish to be perfect,’ answered Jesus, ‘go and sell your property, and give to the poor, and you will have wealth in heaven; then come and follow me.’
MAT 19:22 On hearing these words, the young man went away distressed, for he had great possessions.
MAT 19:23 At this, Jesus said to his disciples, ‘I tell you that a rich person will find it hard to enter the kingdom of heaven!
MAT 19:24 I say again, it is easier for a camel to get through a needle’s eye than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of heaven!’
MAT 19:25 On hearing this, the disciples exclaimed in great astonishment, ‘Who then can possibly be saved?’
MAT 19:26 But Jesus looked at them, and said, ‘With people this is impossible, but with God everything is possible.’ Then Peter turned and said to Jesus,
MAT 19:27 ‘But we – we left everything, and followed you; what, then, will we have?’
MAT 19:28 ‘I tell you,’ answered Jesus, ‘that at the new creation, when the Son of Man takes his seat on his throne of glory, you who followed me will be seated on twelve thrones, as judges of the twelve tribes of Israel.
MAT 19:29 Everyone who has left houses, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or children, or land, for my sake, will receive many times as much, and will gain eternal life.
MAT 19:30 But many who are first now will then be last, and those who are last will be first.
MAT 20:1 For the kingdom of heaven is like an employer who went out in the early morning to hire labourers for his vineyards.
MAT 20:2 He agreed with the labourers to pay them the standard daily rate of two silver coins, and sent them into his vineyard.
MAT 20:3 On going out again, about nine o’clock, he saw some others standing in the marketplace, doing nothing.
MAT 20:4 “You also may go into my vineyard,” he said, “and I will pay you what is fair.”
MAT 20:5 So they went. Going out again about midday and about three o’clock, he did as before.
MAT 20:6 When he went out about five, he found some others standing there, and said to them “Why have you been standing here all day long, doing nothing?”
MAT 20:7 “Because no one has hired us,” they answered. “You also may go into my vineyard,” he said.
MAT 20:8 In the evening the owner of the vineyard said to his steward “Call the labourers, and pay them their wages, beginning with the last, and ending with the first.”
MAT 20:9 Now when those who had been hired about five o’clock went up, they received two silver coins each.
MAT 20:10 So, when the first went up, they thought that they would receive more, but they also received two silver coins each;
MAT 20:11 at which they began to grumble at their employer.
MAT 20:12 “These last,” they said, “have done only one hour’s work, and yet you have put them on the same footing with us, who have borne the brunt of the day’s work, and the heat.”
MAT 20:13 “My friend,” was his reply to one of them, “I am not treating you unfairly. Didn’t you agree with me for two silver coins?
MAT 20:14 Take what belongs to you, and go. I choose to give to this last man the same as to you.
MAT 20:15 Don’t I have the right to do as I choose with what is mine? Are you envious because I am generous?”
MAT 20:16 So those who are last will be first, and the first last.’
MAT 20:17 When Jesus was on the point of going up to Jerusalem, he gathered the twelve disciples round him by themselves, and said to them as they were on their way,
MAT 20:18 ‘Listen! We are going up to Jerusalem; and there the Son of Man will be betrayed to the chief priests and teachers of the Law, and they will condemn him to death,
MAT 20:19 and give him up to the Gentiles for them to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify; and on the third day he will rise.’
MAT 20:20 Then the mother of Zebedee’s sons came to him with her sons, bowing to the ground, and begging a favour.
MAT 20:21 ‘What is it that you want?’ he asked. ‘I want you to say,’ she replied, ‘that in your kingdom these two sons of mine may sit, one on your right, and the other on your left.’
MAT 20:22 ‘You do not know what you are asking,’ was Jesus’ answer. ‘Can you drink the cup that I am to drink?’ ‘Yes,’ they exclaimed, ‘we can.’
MAT 20:23 ‘You will indeed drink my cup,’ he said, ‘but as to a seat at my right and at my left – that is not mine to give, but it is for those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.’
MAT 20:24 On hearing of this, the ten others were very indignant about the two brothers.
MAT 20:25 Jesus, however, called the ten to him, and said, ‘The rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them as you know, and their high officials oppress them.
MAT 20:26 Among you it is not so.
MAT 20:27 No, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant, and whoever wants to take the first place among you, must be your slave;
MAT 20:28 just as the Son of Man came, not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.’
MAT 20:29 As they were going out of Jericho, a great crowd followed him.
MAT 20:30 Two blind men who were sitting by the roadside, hearing that Jesus was passing, called out, ‘Take pity on us, Master, Son of David!’
MAT 20:31 The crowd told them to be quiet; but the men only called out the louder, ‘Take pity on us, Master, Son of David!’
MAT 20:32 Then Jesus stopped and called them. ‘What do you want me to do for you?’ he said.
MAT 20:33 ‘Master,’ they replied, ‘we want our eyes to be opened.’
MAT 20:34 So Jesus, moved with compassion, touched their eyes, and immediately they recovered their sight, and followed him.
MAT 21:1 When they had almost reached Jerusalem, having come as far as Bethphage, on the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent on two disciples.
MAT 21:2 ‘Go to the village facing you,’ he said, ‘and you will immediately find a donkey tethered, with a foal by her side; untie her, and lead her here for me.
MAT 21:3 And, if anyone says anything to you, you are to say this – “The Master wants them”; and he will send them at once.’
MAT 21:4 This happened in fulfilment of these words in the prophet –
MAT 21:5 “Say to the people of Zion – ‘Your King is coming to you, gentle, and riding on a donkey, and on the foal of a beast of burden.’”
MAT 21:6 So the disciples went and did as Jesus had directed them.
MAT 21:7 They led the donkey and the foal back, and, when they had put their cloaks on them, he seated himself on them.
MAT 21:8 The immense crowd of people spread their cloaks in the road, while some cut branches off the trees, and spread them on the road.
MAT 21:9 The crowds that led the way, as well as those that followed behind, kept shouting, ‘God save the Son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! God save him from on high!’
MAT 21:10 When he had entered Jerusalem, the whole city was stirred, and asked –
MAT 21:11 ‘Who is this?’, to which the crowd replied – ‘This is the prophet Jesus from Nazareth in Galilee.’
MAT 21:12 Jesus went into the Temple Courts, and drove out all those who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers, and the seats of the pigeon-dealers,
MAT 21:13 and said to them, ‘Scripture says “My house will be called a house of prayer”; but you are making it a den of robbers.’
MAT 21:14 While he was still in the Temple Courts, some blind and some lame people came up to him, and he cured them.
MAT 21:15 But, when the chief priests and the teachers of the Law saw the wonderful things that Jesus did, and the boys who were calling out in the Temple Courts ‘God save the Son of David!’, they were indignant,
MAT 21:16 and said to him, ‘Do you hear what these boys are saying?’ ‘Yes,’ answered Jesus, ‘but did you never read the words – “Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings you have called forth perfect praise”?’
MAT 21:17 Then he left them, and went out of the city to Bethany, and spent the night there.
MAT 21:18 The next morning, in returning to the city, Jesus became hungry;
MAT 21:19 and, noticing a solitary fig tree by the roadside, he went up to it, but found nothing on it but leaves. So he said to it, ‘Never again will fruit be gathered off you.’ And suddenly the fruit tree withered up.
MAT 21:20 When the disciples saw this, they exclaimed in astonishment, ‘How suddenly the fig tree withered up!’
MAT 21:21 ‘I tell you,’ replied Jesus, ‘if you have faith and don’t doubt, you will not only do what has been done to the fig tree, but even if you were to say to this hill “Be lifted up and hurled into the sea!” it would be done.
MAT 21:22 And whatever you ask for in your prayers will, if you have faith, be granted you.’
MAT 21:23 After Jesus had come into the Temple Courts, the chief priests and the elders of the people came up to him as he was teaching, and said, ‘What authority have you to do these things? Who gave you this authority?’
MAT 21:24 ‘I, too,’ said Jesus in reply, ‘will ask you one question; if you will give me an answer to it, then I, also, will tell you what authority I have to act as I do.
MAT 21:25 It is about John’s baptism. What was its origin? Divine or human?’ But they began arguing among themselves, ‘If we say “divine,” he will say to us “Why then didn’t you believe him?”
MAT 21:26 But if we say “human,” we are afraid of the people, for everyone regards John as a prophet.’
MAT 21:27 So the answer they gave Jesus was – ‘We do not know.’ ‘Then I,’ he said, ‘refuse to tell you what authority I have to do these things.
MAT 21:28 What do you think of this? There was a man who had two sons. He went to the elder and said “Go and work in the vineyard today my son.”
MAT 21:29 “Yes, sir,” he answered; but he did not go.
MAT 21:30 Then the father went to the second son, and said the same. “I will not,” he answered; but afterwards he was sorry and went.
MAT 21:31 Which of the two sons did as his father wished?’ ‘The second,’ they said. ‘I tell you,’ added Jesus, ‘that tax collectors and prostitutes are going into the kingdom of God before you.
MAT 21:32 For when John came to you, walking in the path of righteousness, you did not believe him, but tax collectors and prostitutes did; and yet you, though you saw this, even then were not sorry, nor did you believe him.
MAT 21:33 ‘Listen to another parable. A man, who was an employer, once planted a vineyard, put a fence round it, dug a winepress in it, built a tower, and then let it out to tenants and went abroad.
MAT 21:34 When the time for the grape harvest drew near, he sent his servants to the tenants, to receive his share of the produce.
MAT 21:35 But the tenants seized his servants, beat one, killed another, and stoned a third.
MAT 21:36 A second time the owner sent some servants, a larger number than before, and the tenants treated them in the same way.
MAT 21:37 As a last resort he sent his son to them. “They will respect my son,” he said.
MAT 21:38 But the tenants, on seeing his son, said to each other “Here is the heir! Come, let us kill him, and get his inheritance.”
MAT 21:39 So they seized him, and threw him outside the vineyard, and killed him.
MAT 21:40 Now, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants?’
MAT 21:41 ‘Miserable wretches!’ they exclaimed, ‘he will put them to a miserable death, and he will let out the vineyard to other tenants, who will pay him his share of the produce at the proper times.’
MAT 21:42 Then Jesus added, ‘Have you never read in the scriptures? – “The stone which the builders despised – has now itself become the cornerstone. This cornerstone has come from the Lord, and is marvellous in our eyes.”
MAT 21:43 That, I tell you, is why the kingdom of God will be taken from you, and given to a nation that does produce the fruit of the kingdom.
MAT 21:44 Yes, and he who falls on this stone will be dashed to pieces, while anyone on whom it falls – it will scatter him as dust.’
MAT 21:45 After listening to these parables, the chief priests and the Pharisees saw that it was about them that he was speaking;
MAT 21:46 yet, although eager to arrest him, they were afraid of the crowds, who regarded him as a prophet.
MAT 22:1 Once more Jesus spoke to them in parables.
MAT 22:2 ‘The kingdom of heaven,’ he said, ‘may be compared to a king who gave a banquet in honour of his son’s wedding.
MAT 22:3 He sent his servants to call those who had been invited to the banquet, but they were unwilling to come.
MAT 22:4 A second time he sent some servants, with orders to say to those who had been invited “I have prepared my meal, my cattle and fat beasts are killed and everything is ready; come to the banquet.”
MAT 22:5 They, however, took no notice, but went off, one to their farm, another to their business;
MAT 22:6 while the rest, seizing his servants, ill-treated them and killed them.
MAT 22:7 The king, in anger, sent his troops, put those murderers to death, and set their city on fire.
MAT 22:8 Then he said to his servants “The banquet is prepared, but those who were invited were not worthy.
MAT 22:9 So go to the cross-roads, and invite everyone you find to the banquet.”
MAT 22:10 The servants went out into the roads and collected all the people whom they found, whether bad or good; and the bridal-hall was filled with guests.
MAT 22:11 But, when the king went in to see his guests, he noticed there a man who had not put on a wedding-robe.
MAT 22:12 So he said to him “My friend, how is it that you came in here without a wedding-robe?” The man was speechless.
MAT 22:13 Then the king said to the attendants “Tie him hand and foot, and put him out into the darkness outside, where there will be weeping and grinding of teeth.”
MAT 22:14 For many are called, but few chosen.’
MAT 22:15 Then the Pharisees went away and conferred together as to how they might lay a trap for Jesus in the course of conversation.
MAT 22:16 They sent their disciples, with the Herodians, to say to him, ‘Teacher, we know that you are an honest person, and that you teach the way of God honestly, and are not afraid of anyone; for you pay no regard to a person’s position.
MAT 22:17 Tell us, then, what you think. Are we right in paying taxes to the Emperor, or not?’
MAT 22:18 Perceiving their malice, Jesus answered, ‘Why are you testing me, you hypocrites?
MAT 22:19 Show me the coin with which the tax is paid.’ And, when they had brought him a coin,
MAT 22:20 he asked, ‘Whose head and title are these?’
MAT 22:21 ‘The Emperor’s,’ they answered, at which he said to them, ‘Then pay to the Emperor what belongs to the Emperor, and to God what belongs to God.’
MAT 22:22 They wondered at his answer, and left him alone and went away.
MAT 22:23 That same day some Sadducees came up to Jesus, maintaining that there is no resurrection. Their question was this, –
MAT 22:24 ‘Teacher, Moses said – “should a man die without children, the man’s brother will become the husband of the widow, and raise a family for his brother.”
MAT 22:25 Now we had living among us seven brothers; of whom the eldest married and died, and, as he had no family, left his wife for his brother.
MAT 22:26 The same thing happened to the second and the third brothers, and indeed to all the seven.
MAT 22:27 The woman herself died last of all.
MAT 22:28 At the resurrection, then, whose wife will she be out of the seven, all of them having been married to her?’
MAT 22:29 ‘Your mistake,’ replied Jesus, ‘is due to your ignorance of the scriptures, and of the power of God.
MAT 22:30 For at the resurrection there is no marrying or being married, but all who rise are as angels in heaven.
MAT 22:31 As to the resurrection of the dead, have you not read these words of God –
MAT 22:32 “I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob”? He is not the God of dead people, but of living.’
MAT 22:33 The crowds, who had been listening to him, were greatly struck with his teaching.
MAT 22:34 When the Pharisees heard that Jesus had silenced the Sadducees, they collected together.
MAT 22:35 Then one of them, a Student of the Law, to test him, asked this question –
MAT 22:36 ‘Teacher, what is the greatest commandment in the Law?’
MAT 22:37 His answer was, ‘You must love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind.
MAT 22:38 This is the great first commandment.
MAT 22:39 The second, which is like it, is this – You must love your neighbour as you love yourself.
MAT 22:40 On these two commandments hang all the Law and the prophets.’
MAT 22:41 Before the Pharisees separated, Jesus put this question to them –
MAT 22:42 ‘What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?’ ‘David’s,’ they said.
MAT 22:43 ‘How is it, then,’ Jesus replied, ‘that David, speaking under inspiration, calls him “lord,” in the passage –
MAT 22:44 “The Lord said to my Lord: Sit at my right hand, until I put your enemies beneath your feet”?
MAT 22:45 Since, then, David calls him “lord,” how is he David’s son?’
MAT 22:46 No one could say a word in answer; nor did anyone after that day venture to question him further.
MAT 23:1 Then Jesus, speaking to the crowds and to his disciples, said,
MAT 23:2 ‘The teachers of the Law and the Pharisees now occupy the chair of Moses.
MAT 23:3 Therefore practice and lay to heart everything that they preach but do not practice.
MAT 23:4 While they make up heavy loads and pile them on other people’s shoulder’s they decline, themselves, to lift a finger to move them.
MAT 23:5 All their actions are done to attract attention. They widen their phylacteries, and increase the size of their tassels,
MAT 23:6 and like to have the place of honour at dinner, and the best seats in the synagogues,
MAT 23:7 and to be greeted in the markets with respect, and to be called “Rabbi” by everybody.
MAT 23:8 But do not allow yourselves to be called “Rabbi,” for you have only one teacher, and you yourselves are all brothers and sisters.
MAT 23:9 And do not call anyone on the earth your “Father,” for you have only one Father, the heavenly Father.
MAT 23:10 Nor must you allow yourselves to be called “leaders,” for you have only one leader, the Christ.
MAT 23:11 The person who wants to be the greatest among you must be your servant.
MAT 23:12 Whoever exalts themselves will be humbled, and whoever humbles themselves will be exalted.
MAT 23:13 But alas for you, teachers of the Law and Pharisees, hypocrites that you are! You turn the key of the kingdom of heaven in people’s faces. For you do not go in yourselves, and do not allow those who try to go in to do so.
MAT 23:14 
MAT 23:15 Alas for you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, hypocrites that you are! You scour land and sea to make a single convert, and, when they are gained, you make them twice as deserving of Gehenna as you are yourselves.
MAT 23:16 Alas for you, you blind guides! You say “if any swear by the Temple, their oath counts for nothing; but, if anyone swears by the gold of the Temple, their oath is binding them”!
MAT 23:17 Fools that you are and blind! Which is the more important? The gold? Or the Temple which has given sacredness to the gold?
MAT 23:18 You say, too, “If anyone swears by the altar, their oath counts for nothing, but, if anyone swears by the offering placed on it, their oath is binding on them”!
MAT 23:19 Blind indeed! Which is the more important? The offering? Or the altar which gives sacredness to the offering?
MAT 23:20 Therefore a person, swearing by the altar, swears by it and by all that is on it,
MAT 23:21 and a person, swearing by the Temple, swears by it and by him who dwells in it,
MAT 23:22 while a person, swearing by heaven, swears by the throne of God, and by him who sits on it.
MAT 23:23 Alas for you, teachers of the Law and Pharisees, hypocrites that you are! You pay tithes on mint, fennel, and caraway seed, and have neglected the weightier matters of the Law – justice, mercy, and good faith. These last you ought to have put into practice, without neglecting the first.
MAT 23:24 You blind guides, to strain out a gnat and to swallow a camel!
MAT 23:25 Alas for you, teachers of the Law and Pharisees, hypocrites that you are! You clean the outside of the cup and the dish, but inside they are filled with the results of greed and self-indulgence.
MAT 23:26 You blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the cup and the dish, so that the outside may become clean as well.
MAT 23:27 Alas for you, teachers of the Law and Pharisees, hypocrites that you are! You are like whitewashed tombs, which indeed look fair outside, while inside they are filled with dead people’s bones and all kinds of filth.
MAT 23:28 It is the same with you. Outwardly, and to others, you have the look of religious people, but inwardly you are full of hypocrisy and sin.
MAT 23:29 Alas for you, teachers of the Law and Pharisees, hypocrites that you are! You build the tombs of the prophets, and decorate the monuments of religious people,
MAT 23:30 and say “Had we been living in the days of our ancestors, we should have taken no part in their murder of the prophets!”
MAT 23:31 By doing this you are furnishing evidence against yourselves that you are true children of the people who murdered the prophets.
MAT 23:32 Go on then, finish what your ancestors began!
MAT 23:33 You snakes and children of snakes! How can you escape being sentenced to Gehenna?
MAT 23:34 That is why I send you prophets, wise people, and teachers of the Law, some of whom you will crucify and kill, and some of whom you will scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from town to town;
MAT 23:35 so that on your heads may fall every drop of innocent blood spilt on earth, from the blood of innocent Abel down to that of Zechariah, Barachiah’s son, whom you murdered between the Temple and the altar.
MAT 23:36 All this, I tell you, will come home to the present generation.
MAT 23:37 Jerusalem! Jerusalem! She who slays the prophets and stones the messengers sent to her – Oh, how often have I wished to gather your children round me, as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and you would not come!
MAT 23:38 Verily, your house is left to you desolate!
MAT 23:39 For nevermore, I tell you, will you see me, until you say – “Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord!”’
MAT 24:1 Leaving the Temple Courts, Jesus was walking away, when his disciples came up to draw his attention to the Temple buildings.
MAT 24:2 ‘Do you see all these things?’ was his answer. ‘I tell you, not a single stone will be left here on another, which will not be thrown down,’
MAT 24:3 so, while Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives, his disciples came up to him privately and said, ‘Tell us when this will be, and what will be the sign of your coming, and of the close of the age.’
MAT 24:4 Jesus replied to them, ‘See that no one leads you astray;
MAT 24:5 for, many will take my name, and come saying “I am the Christ,” and will lead many astray.
MAT 24:6 You will hear of wars and rumours of wars; take care not to be alarmed, for such things must occur; but the end is not yet here.
MAT 24:7 For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be famines and earthquakes in various places.
MAT 24:8 All this, however, will be but the beginning of the birth pangs!
MAT 24:9 When that time comes, they will give you up to persecution, and will put you to death, and you will be hated by all nations because of me.
MAT 24:10 And then many will fall away, and will betray one another, and hate one another.
MAT 24:11 Many false prophets, also, will appear and lead many astray;
MAT 24:12 and, owing to the increase of wickedness, the love of most will grow cold.
MAT 24:13 Yet the person who endures to the end will be saved.
MAT 24:14 This good news of the kingdom will be proclaimed throughout the world as a witness to all nations; and then will come the end.
MAT 24:15 As soon, then, as you see “the Foul Desecration,” mentioned by the prophet Daniel, standing in the Holy place,’ (the reader must consider what this means)
MAT 24:16 ‘then those of you who are in Judea must take refuge in the mountains;
MAT 24:17 and a man on the housetop must not go down to get the things that are in his house;
MAT 24:18 nor must one who is on their farm turn back to get his cloak.
MAT 24:19 Alas for pregnant women, and for those who are nursing infants in those days!
MAT 24:20 Pray, too, that your flight may not take place in winter, nor on a Sabbath;
MAT 24:21 for that will be a time of great distress, the like of which has not occurred from the beginning of the world down to the present time – no, nor ever will again.
MAT 24:22 Had not those days been limited, not a single soul would escape; but for the sake of God’s people a limit will be put to them.
MAT 24:23 At that time, if anyone should say to you “Look! Here is the Christ!” or “Here he is!”, do not believe it;
MAT 24:24 for false Christs and false prophets will arise, and will display great signs and marvels, so that, were it possible, even God’s people would be led astray.
MAT 24:25 Remember, I have told you beforehand.
MAT 24:26 Therefore, if people say to you “He is in the wilderness!”, do not go out there; or “He is in an inner room!”, do not believe it;
MAT 24:27 for, just as lightning will start from the east and flash across to the west, so will it be with the coming of the Son of Man.
MAT 24:28 Wherever a dead body lies, there will the vultures flock.
MAT 24:29 Immediately after the distress of those days, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give her light, the stars will fall from the heavens, and the forces of the heavens will be convulsed.
MAT 24:30 Then will appear the sign of the Son of Man in the heavens; and all the peoples of the earth will mourn, when they see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of the heavens, with power and great glory;
MAT 24:31 and he will send his angels, with a great trumpet, and they will gather his people round him from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.
MAT 24:32 ‘Learn the lesson taught by the fig tree. As soon as its branches are full of sap, and it is bursting into leaf, you know that summer is near.
MAT 24:33 And so may you, as soon as you see all these things, know that he is at your doors.
MAT 24:34 I tell you, even the present generation will not pass away, until all these things have taken place.
MAT 24:35 The heavens and the earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
MAT 24:36 But about that day and hour, no one knows – not even the angels of heaven, not even the Son – but only the Father himself.
MAT 24:37 For, just as in the days of Noah, so will it be at the coming of the Son of Man.
MAT 24:38 In those days before the flood they went on eating and drinking, marrying and being married, up to the very day on which Noah entered the ark.
MAT 24:39 They didn’t realise what was going to happen until the flood came and swept them one and all away; and so will it be at the coming of the Son of Man.
MAT 24:40 At that time, of two men on a farm one will be taken and one left;
MAT 24:41 of two women grinding with a hand-mill one will be taken and one left.
MAT 24:42 Therefore watch; for you cannot be sure on what day your Master is coming.
MAT 24:43 But this you do know, that, had the owner of the house known at what time of night the thief was coming, they would have been on the watch, and would not have allowed their house to be broken into.
MAT 24:44 Therefore, you must also prepare, since it is just when you are least expecting him that the Son of Man will come.
MAT 24:45 Who, then is that trustworthy, careful servant, who has been placed by their master over his household, to give them their food at the proper time?
MAT 24:46 Happy will that servant be whom their master, when he comes home, will find doing this.
MAT 24:47 I tell you that their master will put them in charge of the whole of his property.
MAT 24:48 But, should the servant be a bad servant, and say to themselves “My master is a long time in coming,”
MAT 24:49 and begin to beat their fellow servants, and eat and drink with drunkards,
MAT 24:50 that servant’s master will come on a day when they do not expect him, and at an hour of which they are unaware,
MAT 24:51 and will flog the servant severely, and assign them their place among the hypocrites, where there will be weeping and grinding of teeth.
MAT 25:1 ‘Then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten bridesmaids who took their lamps and went out to meet the groom.
MAT 25:2 Five of them were foolish, and five were prudent.
MAT 25:3 The foolish ones took their lamps, but took no oil with them;
MAT 25:4 while the prudent ones, besides taking their lamps, took oil in their jars.
MAT 25:5 As the groom was late in coming, they all became drowsy, and slept.
MAT 25:6 But at midnight a shout was raised – “The groom is coming! Come out to meet him!”
MAT 25:7 Then all the bridesmaids woke up and trimmed their lamps,
MAT 25:8 and the foolish said to the prudent “Give us some of your oil; our lamps are going out.”
MAT 25:9 But the prudent ones answered “No, There may not be enough for you and for us. Go instead to those who sell it, and buy for yourselves.”
MAT 25:10 But while they were on their way to buy it, the groom came; and the bridesmaids who were ready went in with him to the banquet, and the door was shut.
MAT 25:11 Afterwards the other bridesmaids came. “Sir, Sir,” they said, “open the door to us!”
MAT 25:12 But the groom answered “I tell you, I do not know you.”
MAT 25:13 Therefore watch, since you know neither the day nor the hour.
MAT 25:14 ‘For it is as though a man, going on his travels, called his servants, and gave his property into their charge.
MAT 25:15 He gave five bags of gold to one, two to another, and one bag to a third, in proportion to the ability of each. Then he set out on his travels.
MAT 25:16 The servant who had received the five bags of gold went at once and traded with it, and made another five bags.
MAT 25:17 So, too, the servant who had received the two bags of gold made another two bags.
MAT 25:18 But the servant who had received the one bag went and dug a hole in the ground, and hid his master’s money.
MAT 25:19 After a long time the master of those servants returned, and settled accounts with them.
MAT 25:20 The servant who had received the five bags of gold came up and brought five bags more. “Sir,” he said, “you entrusted me with five bags of gold; look, I have made another five bags!”
MAT 25:21 “Well done, good, trustworthy servant!” said his master. “You have been trustworthy with a small sum; now I will place a large one in your hands; come and share your master’s joy!”
MAT 25:22 Then the one who had received the two bags of gold came up and said “Sir, you entrusted me with two bags of gold. Look, I have made another two!”
MAT 25:23 “Well done, good, trustworthy servant!” said his master. “You have been trustworthy with a small sum; now I will place a large one in your hands; come and share your master’s joy!”
MAT 25:24 The man who had received the single bag of gold came up, too, and said “Sir, I knew that you were a hard man; you reap where you have not sown, and gather up where you have not winnowed;
MAT 25:25 and, in my fear, I went and hid your money in the ground; look, here is what belongs to you!”
MAT 25:26 “You lazy, worthless servant!” was his master’s reply. “You knew that I reap where I have not sown, and gather up where I have not winnowed?
MAT 25:27 Then you ought to have placed my money in the hands of bankers, and I, on my return, should have received my money, with interest.
MAT 25:28 Therefore,” he continued, “take away from him the one bag of gold, and give it to the one who has the ten bags.
MAT 25:29 For, to him who has, more will be given, and he will have abundance; but, as for him who has nothing, even what he has will be taken away from him.
MAT 25:30 As for the useless servant, put him out into the darkness outside, where there will be weeping and grinding of teeth.”
MAT 25:31 ‘When the Son of Man has come in his glory and all the angels with him, then he will take his seat on his throne of glory;
MAT 25:32 and all the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate the people – just as a shepherd separates sheep from goats –
MAT 25:33 placing the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on his left.
MAT 25:34 Then the king will say to those on his right “Come, you who are blessed by my Father, enter into possession of the kingdom prepared for you ever since the beginning of the world.
MAT 25:35 For, when I was hungry, you gave me food; when I was thirsty, you gave me drink; when I was a stranger, you took me to your homes;
MAT 25:36 when I was naked, you clothed me; when I fell ill, you visited me; and when I was in prison, you came to me.”
MAT 25:37 Then the righteous will answer “Lord, when did we see you hungry, and feed you? Or thirsty, and give you a drink?
MAT 25:38 When did we see you a stranger, and take you to our homes? Or naked, and clothe you?
MAT 25:39 When did we see you ill, or in prison, and come to you?”
MAT 25:40 And the king will reply “I tell you, as often as you did it to one of these my brothers or sisters, however unimportant they seemed, you did it to me.”
MAT 25:41 Then he will say to those on his left “Go from my presence, accursed, into the permanent fire which has been prepared for the devil and his angels.
MAT 25:42 For, when I was hungry, you gave me no food; when I was thirsty, you gave me no drink;
MAT 25:43 when I was a stranger, you did not take me to your homes; when I was naked, you did not clothe me; and, when I was ill and in prison, you did not visit me.”
MAT 25:44 Then they, in their turn, will answer “Lord, when did we see you hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or ill, or in prison, and did not supply your wants?”
MAT 25:45 And then he will reply “I tell you, as often as you failed to do it to one of these, however unimportant, you failed to do it to me.”
MAT 25:46 And these last will go away into lasting correction, but the righteous into lasting life.’
MAT 26:1 When Jesus had finished teaching all of that, he said to his disciples,
MAT 26:2 ‘You know that in two days time the Festival of the Passover will be here; and that the Son of Man is to be given up to be crucified.’
MAT 26:3 Then the chief priests and the elders of the people met in the house of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas,
MAT 26:4 and plotted together to arrest Jesus by stealth and put him to death;
MAT 26:5 but they said, ‘Not during the Festival, or the people may riot.’
MAT 26:6 After Jesus had reached Bethany, and while he was in the house of Simon the leper,
MAT 26:7 a woman came up to him with an alabaster jar of very costly perfume, and poured the perfume on his head as he sat at the table.
MAT 26:8 The disciples were indignant at seeing this. ‘What is this waste for?’ they exclaimed.
MAT 26:9 ‘It could have been sold for a large sum, and the money given to poor people.’
MAT 26:10 ‘Why are you troubling the woman?’ Jesus said, when he noticed it. ‘For this is a beautiful deed that she has done to me.
MAT 26:11 You always have the poor with you, but you will not always have me.
MAT 26:12 In pouring this perfume on my body, she prepares me for my burial.
MAT 26:13 I tell you, wherever, in the whole world, this good news is proclaimed, what this woman has done will be told in memory of her.’
MAT 26:14 It was then that one of the Twelve, named Judas Iscariot, made his way to the chief priests,
MAT 26:15 and said ‘What are you willing to give me, if I betray Jesus to you?’ The Priests counted him out thirty pieces of silver as payment.
MAT 26:16 So from that time Judas looked for an opportunity to betray Jesus.
MAT 26:17 On the first day of the Festival of the unleavened bread, the disciples came up to Jesus, and said, ‘Where do you wish us to make preparations for you to eat the Passover?’
MAT 26:18 ‘Go into the city to a certain man,’ he answered, ‘and say to him “The teacher says – My time is near. I will keep the Passover with my disciples at your house.”’
MAT 26:19 The disciples did as Jesus directed them, and prepared the Passover.
MAT 26:20 In the evening Jesus took his place with the twelve disciples,
MAT 26:21 and, while they were eating, he said, ‘I tell you that one of you will betray me.’
MAT 26:22 In great grief they began to say to him, one by one, ‘Can it be I, Master?’
MAT 26:23 ‘The one who dipped his bread beside me in the dish,’ replied Jesus, ‘is the one who will betray me.
MAT 26:24 True, the Son of Man must go, as scripture says of him, yet alas for that man by whom the Son of Man is being betrayed! For that man it would be better never to have been born!’
MAT 26:25 Judas, who was betraying him, turned to him and said, ‘Can it be I, Rabbi?’ ‘It is,’ answered Jesus.
MAT 26:26 While they were eating, Jesus took some bread, and, after saying the blessing, broke it and, as he gave it to his disciples, said, ‘Take it and eat it; this is my body.’
MAT 26:27 Then he took a cup, and, after saying the thanksgiving, gave it to them, with the words, ‘Drink from it, all of you;
MAT 26:28 for this is my covenant blood, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.
MAT 26:29 I tell you that I will never, after this, drink of this juice of the grape, until that day when I will drink it new with you in the kingdom of my Father.’
MAT 26:30 They then sang a hymn, and went out to the Mount of Olives.
MAT 26:31 Then Jesus said to them, ‘Even you will all fall away from me tonight. Scripture says – “I will strike down the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.”
MAT 26:32 But, after I have risen, I will go before you into Galilee.’
MAT 26:33 ‘If everyone else falls away from you,’ Peter answered, ‘I will never fall away!’
MAT 26:34 ‘I tell you,’ replied Jesus, ‘that this very night, before the cock crows, you will disown me three times!’
MAT 26:35 ‘Even if I must die with you,’ Peter exclaimed, ‘I will never disown you!’ All the disciples spoke in the same way.
MAT 26:36 Then Jesus came with them to a garden called Gethsemane, and he said to his disciples, ‘Sit down here while I go and pray over there.’
MAT 26:37 Taking with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to show signs of sadness and deep distress of mind.
MAT 26:38 ‘I am sad at heart,’ he said, ‘sad even to death; wait here and watch with me.’
MAT 26:39 Going on a little further, he threw himself on his face in prayer. ‘My Father,’ he said, ‘if it is possible, let me be spared this cup; only, not as I will, but as you will.’
MAT 26:40 Then he came to his disciples, and found them asleep. ‘What!’ he said to Peter, ‘could none of you watch with me for one hour?
MAT 26:41 Watch and pray so that you don’t fall into temptation. True, the spirit is eager, but human nature is weak.’
MAT 26:42 Again, a second time, he went away, and prayed. ‘My Father,’ he said, ‘if I cannot be spared this cup, but must drink it, your will be done!’
MAT 26:43 And coming back again he found them asleep, for their eyes were heavy.
MAT 26:44 So he left them, and went away again, and prayed a third time, again saying the same words.
MAT 26:45 Then he came to the disciples, and said, ‘Sleep on now, and rest yourselves. Look – my time is close at hand, and the Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of wicked people.
MAT 26:46 Up, and let us be going. Look! My betrayer is close at hand.’
MAT 26:47 And, while he was still speaking, Judas, who was one of the Twelve, came in sight; and with him was a great crowd of people, with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests and elders of the people.
MAT 26:48 Now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them. ‘The man whom I kiss,’ he had said, ‘will be the one; arrest him.’
MAT 26:49 So he went up to Jesus at once, and exclaimed, ‘Welcome, Rabbi!’ and kissed him;
MAT 26:50 at which Jesus said to him, ‘Friend, do what you have come for.’ The men went up, seized Jesus, and arrested him.
MAT 26:51 Suddenly one of those who were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and striking the high priest’s servant, cut off his ear.
MAT 26:52 ‘Sheathe your sword,’ Jesus said, ‘for all who draw the sword will be put to the sword.
MAT 26:53 Do you think that I cannot ask my Father for help, when he would at once send to my aid more than twelve legions of angels?
MAT 26:54 But in that case how would the scriptures be fulfilled, which say that this must be?’
MAT 26:55 Jesus at the same time said to the crowds, ‘Have you come out, as if after a robber, with swords and clubs, to take me? I have sat teaching day after day in the Temple Courts, and yet you did not arrest me.’
MAT 26:56 The whole of this occurred in fulfilment of the prophetic scriptures. Then the disciples all forsook him and fled.
MAT 26:57 Those who had arrested Jesus took him to Caiaphas, the high priest, where the teachers of the Law and elders had assembled.
MAT 26:58 Peter followed him at a distance as far as the high priest’s courtyard, to see the outcome.
MAT 26:59 Meanwhile the chief priests and the whole of the High Council were trying to get such false evidence against Jesus, as would warrant putting him to death,
MAT 26:60 but they did not find any, although many came forward with false evidence. Later on, however, two men came forward and said,
MAT 26:61 ‘This man said “I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three days.”’
MAT 26:62 Then the high priest stood up, and said to Jesus, ‘Have you no answer? What is this evidence which these men are giving against you?’
MAT 26:63 But Jesus remained silent. The high priest said to him, ‘I order you, by the living God, to tell us whether you are the Christ, the Son of God.’
MAT 26:64 ‘It is true,’ Jesus answered, ‘Moreover I tell you all that hereafter you will see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the Almighty, and coming on the clouds of the heavens.’
MAT 26:65 Then the high priest tore his robes. ‘This is blasphemy!’ he exclaimed. ‘Why do we want any more witnesses? You have just heard his blasphemy!
MAT 26:66 What is your decision?’ They answered, ‘He deserves death.’
MAT 26:67 Then they spat in his face, and struck him, while others dealt blows at him, saying as they did so,
MAT 26:68 ‘Now play the prophet for us, you Christ! Who was it that struck you?’
MAT 26:69 Peter, meanwhile, was sitting outside in the courtyard; and a maidservant came up to him, and exclaimed, ‘Why, you were with Jesus the Galilean!’
MAT 26:70 But Peter denied it before them all. ‘I do not know what you mean,’ he replied.
MAT 26:71 When he had gone out into the gateway, another maid saw him, and said to those who were there, ‘This man was with Jesus of Nazareth!’
MAT 26:72 Again he denied it with an oath, ‘I do not know the man!’
MAT 26:73 But soon afterwards those who were standing by came up and said to Peter, ‘You also are certainly one of them; why, even your way of speaking proves it!’
MAT 26:74 Then Peter said, ‘I swear that I do not know the man! May God punish me if I am lying!’ At that moment a cock crowed;
MAT 26:75 and Peter remembered the words which Jesus had said – “Before a cock has crowed, you will disown me three times”; and he went outside, and wept bitterly.
MAT 27:1 At daybreak all the chief priests and the elders of the people consulted together against Jesus, to bring about his death.
MAT 27:2 They put him in chains and led him away, and gave him up to the Roman Governor, Pilate.
MAT 27:3 Then Judas, who betrayed him, seeing that Jesus was condemned, repented of what he had done, and returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders.
MAT 27:4 ‘I did wrong in betraying a good man to his death,’ he said. ‘What has that to do with us?’ they replied. ‘You must see to that yourself.’
MAT 27:5 Judas flung down the pieces of silver in the Temple, and left; and went away and hanged himself.
MAT 27:6 The chief priests took the pieces of silver, but they said, ‘We must not put them into the Temple treasury, because they are blood-money.’
MAT 27:7 So, after consultation, they used it to buy the “Potter’s Field” as a burial ground for foreigners,
MAT 27:8 and that is why that field is called the “Field of Blood” to this very day.
MAT 27:9 Then it was that these words spoken by the prophet Jeremiah were fulfilled – “They took the thirty pieces of silver, the price set on him by the people of Israel,
MAT 27:10 and gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord commanded me.”
MAT 27:11 Meanwhile Jesus was brought before the Roman Governor. ‘Are you the king of the Jews?’ asked the Governor. ‘It is true,’ answered Jesus.
MAT 27:12 While charges were being brought against him by the chief priests and elders, Jesus made no reply.
MAT 27:13 Then Pilate said to him, ‘Don’t you hear how many accusations they are making against you?’
MAT 27:14 Yet Jesus made no reply – not even a single word; at which the Governor was greatly astonished.
MAT 27:15 Now, at the feast, the Governor was accustomed to grant the people the release of any one prisoner whom they might choose.
MAT 27:16 At that time they had a notorious prisoner called Barabbas.
MAT 27:17 So, when the people had collected, Pilate said to them, ‘Which do you wish me to release for you? Barabbas? Or Jesus who is called “Christ”?’
MAT 27:18 For he knew that it was out of jealousy that they had given Jesus up to him.
MAT 27:19 While he was still on the Bench, his wife sent this message to him – ‘Do not have anything to do with that good man, for I have been very much troubled today in a dream because of him.’
MAT 27:20 But the chief priests and elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas, and to kill Jesus.
MAT 27:21 The Governor, however, said to them, ‘Which of these two do you wish me to release for you?’ ‘Barabbas,’ they answered.
MAT 27:22 ‘What then,’ Pilate asked, ‘should I do with Jesus who is called “Christ?”’ ‘Crucify him,’ they all replied.
MAT 27:23 ‘Why, what harm has he done?’ he asked. But they kept shouting furiously, ‘Crucify him!’
MAT 27:24 When Pilate saw that his efforts were unavailing, but that, on the contrary, a riot was beginning, he took some water, and washed his hands in the sight of the crowd, saying as he did so, ‘I am not answerable for this bloodshed; you must see to it yourselves.’
MAT 27:25 And all the people answered, ‘His blood be on our heads and on our children’s!’
MAT 27:26 Then Pilate released Barabbas to them, but Jesus he had scourged, and gave him up to be crucified.
MAT 27:27 After that, the Governor’s soldiers took Jesus with them into the Government house, and gathered the whole garrison round him.
MAT 27:28 They stripped him, and put on him a red military cloak,
MAT 27:29 and having twisted some thorns into a crown, put it on his head, and a rod in his right hand, and then, going down on their knees before him, they mocked him. ‘Long life to you, king of the Jews!’ they said.
MAT 27:30 They spat at him and, taking the rod, kept striking him on the head;
MAT 27:31 and, when they had left off mocking him, they took off the military cloak, and put his own clothes on him, and led him away to be crucified.
MAT 27:32 As they were on their way out, they came upon a man from Cyrene called Simon, and they compelled him to go with them to carry the cross.
MAT 27:33 On reaching a place named Golgotha (a place named from its likeness to a skull),
MAT 27:34 they gave him some wine to drink which had been mixed with gall; but after tasting it, Jesus refused to drink it.
MAT 27:35 When they had crucified him, they divided his clothes among them by casting lots.
MAT 27:36 Then they sat down, and kept watch over him there.
MAT 27:37 Above his head they fixed the accusation against him written out – “THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.”
MAT 27:38 At the same time two robbers were crucified with him, one on the right, the other on the left.
MAT 27:39 The passers-by railed at him, shaking their heads as they said,
MAT 27:40 ‘You who would “destroy the Temple and build one in three days,” save yourself! If you are God’s Son, come down from the cross!’
MAT 27:41 In the same way the chief priests, with the Teachers of the Law and elders, said in mockery,
MAT 27:42 ‘He saved others, but he cannot save himself! He is the “king of Israel”! Why doesn’t he come down from the cross now, then we will believe in him.
MAT 27:43 He has trusted in God; if God wants him, let him deliver him now; for he said “I am God’s Son.”’
MAT 27:44 Even the robbers, who were crucified with him, insulted him in the same way.
MAT 27:45 After midday a darkness came over all the country, lasting until three in the afternoon.
MAT 27:46 About three Jesus called out loudly, ‘Eloi, Eloi, lema sabacthani’ – that is to say, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”
MAT 27:47 Some of those standing by heard this, and said, ‘The man is calling for Elijah!’
MAT 27:48 One of them immediately ran and took a sponge, and, filling it with common wine, put it on the end of a rod, and offered it to him to drink.
MAT 27:49 But the rest said, ‘Wait and let us see if Elijah is coming to save him.’
MAT 27:50 But Jesus, uttering another loud cry, gave up his spirit.
MAT 27:51 Suddenly the Temple curtain was torn in two from top to bottom, the earth shook, the rocks were torn asunder,
MAT 27:52 the tombs opened, and the bodies of many of God’s people who had fallen asleep rose,
MAT 27:53 and they, leaving their tombs, went, after the resurrection of Jesus, into the Holy City, and appeared to many people.
MAT 27:54 The Roman centurion, and the men with him who were watching Jesus, on seeing the earthquake and all that was happening, became greatly frightened and exclaimed, ‘This must indeed have been God’s Son!’
MAT 27:55 There were many women there, watching from a distance, who had accompanied Jesus from Galilee and had been attending on him.
MAT 27:56 Among them were Mary of Magdala, Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of Zebedee’s sons.
MAT 27:57 When evening had fallen, there came a rich man from Arimathea, named Joseph, who had himself become a disciple of Jesus.
MAT 27:58 He went to see Pilate, and asked for the body of Jesus. Pilate ordered it to be given him.
MAT 27:59 So Joseph took the body, and wrapped it in a clean linen sheet,
MAT 27:60 and laid it in his newly made tomb which he had cut in the rock; and, before he left, he rolled a great stone against the entrance of the tomb.
MAT 27:61 Mary of Magdala and the other Mary remained behind, sitting in front of the grave.
MAT 27:62 The next day – that is, the day following the Preparation-day – the chief priests and Pharisees came in a body to Pilate, and said,
MAT 27:63 ‘Sir, we remember that, during his lifetime, that impostor said “I will rise after three days.”
MAT 27:64 So order the tomb to be made secure until the third day. Otherwise his disciples may come and steal him, and then say to the people “He has risen from the dead,” when the latest imposture will be worse than the first.’
MAT 27:65 ‘You may have a guard,’ was Pilate’s reply. ‘Go and make the tomb as secure as you can.’
MAT 27:66 So they went and made the tomb secure, by sealing the stone, in presence of the guard.
MAT 28:1 After the Sabbath, as the first day of the week began to dawn, Mary of Magdala and the other Mary had gone to look at the grave,
MAT 28:2 when suddenly a great earthquake occurred. For an angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled away the stone, and seated himself on it.
MAT 28:3 His appearance was as dazzling as lightning, and his clothing was as white as snow;
MAT 28:4 and, in their terror of him, the men on guard trembled violently and became like dead men.
MAT 28:5 But the angel, addressing the women, said, ‘You need not be afraid. I know that it is Jesus, who was crucified, for whom you are looking.
MAT 28:6 He is not here; for he has risen, as he said he would. Come, and see the place where he was lying;
MAT 28:7 and then go quickly and say to his disciples “He has risen from the dead, and is going before you into Galilee; there you will see him.” Remember, I have told you.’
MAT 28:8 They left the tomb quickly, in awe and great joy, and ran to tell the news to the disciples.
MAT 28:9 Suddenly Jesus met them. ‘Welcome!’ he said. The women went up to him, and clasped his feet, bowing to the ground before him. Then Jesus said to them,
MAT 28:10 ‘Do not be afraid; go and tell my brothers and sisters to set out for Galilee, and they will see me there.’
MAT 28:11 While they were still on their way, some of the guard came into the city, and reported to the chief priests everything that had happened.
MAT 28:12 So they and the elders met and, after holding a consultation, gave a large sum of money to the soldiers,
MAT 28:13 and told them to say that his disciples came in the night, and stole him while they were asleep;
MAT 28:14 ‘And should this matter come before the Governor,’ they added, ‘we will satisfy him, and see that you have nothing to fear.’
MAT 28:15 So the soldiers took the money, and did as they were instructed. This story spread widely; the people of Judea still tell it today.
MAT 28:16 The eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus told them to meet him;
MAT 28:17 and, when they saw him, they bowed to the ground before him; although some felt doubtful.
MAT 28:18 Then Jesus came up, and spoke to them, saying, ‘All authority in heaven and on the earth has been given to me.
MAT 28:19 Therefore go and make disciples of all the nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
MAT 28:20 and teaching them to lay to heart all the commands that I have given you; and, remember, I myself am with you every day until the close of the age.’
MAR 1:1 The beginning of the good news about Jesus Christ.
MAR 1:2 It is said in the prophet Isaiah – “I am sending my messenger ahead of you; he will prepare your way.
MAR 1:3 The voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the road for the Lord, make a straight path for him.’”
MAR 1:4 John the Baptiser appeared in the wilderness, proclaiming a baptism on repentance, for the forgiveness of sins.
MAR 1:5 The whole of Judea, as well as all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, went out to him; and they were baptised by him in the Jordan River, confessing their sins.
MAR 1:6 John wore clothes made of camels’ hair, with a leather strap round his waist, and lived on locusts and wild honey;
MAR 1:7 and he proclaimed – ‘After me is coming someone more powerful than I am, and I am not fit even to stoop down and unfasten his sandals.
MAR 1:8 I have baptised you with water, but he will baptise you with the Holy Spirit.’
MAR 1:9 Now about that time Jesus came from Nazareth in Galilee, and was baptised by John in the Jordan.
MAR 1:10 Just as he was coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens split open and the Spirit coming down to him like a dove,
MAR 1:11 and from the heavens came a voice – ‘You are my dearly loved son; you bring me great joy.’
MAR 1:12 Immediately afterwards the Spirit drove Jesus out into the wilderness;
MAR 1:13 and he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted by Satan, and among the wild beasts, while the angels helped him.
MAR 1:14 After John had been arrested, Jesus went to Galilee, proclaiming the good news of God –
MAR 1:15 ‘The time has come, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent, and believe the good news.’
MAR 1:16 As Jesus was going along the shore of the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and his brother Andrew casting a net in the sea, for they were fishermen.
MAR 1:17 ‘Come and follow me,’ Jesus said, ‘and I will teach you to fish for people.’
MAR 1:18 They left their nets at once, and followed him.
MAR 1:19 Going on a little further, he saw James, Zebedee’s son, and his brother John, who were in their boat mending the nets.
MAR 1:20 Jesus called them at once, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the crew, and went after him.
MAR 1:21 They walked to Capernaum. On the next Sabbath Jesus went into the synagogue and began to teach.
MAR 1:22 The people were amazed at his teaching, for he taught them like one who had authority, and not like the teachers of the Law.
MAR 1:23 Now there was in their synagogue at the time a man under the power of a foul spirit, who called out,
MAR 1:24 ‘What do you want with us, Jesus the Nazarene? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are – the Holy One of God!’
MAR 1:25 But Jesus rebuked the spirit, ‘Be silent! Come out from him.’
MAR 1:26 The foul spirit threw the man into a fit, and with a loud cry came out from him.
MAR 1:27 They were all so amazed that they kept asking each other, ‘What is this? What is this, a new kind of teaching? He gives his commands with authority even to the foul spirits, and they obey him!’
MAR 1:28 His fame spread at once in all directions, through the whole region of Galilee.
MAR 1:29 As soon as they had left the synagogue, they went to the house of Simon and Andrew, along with James and John.
MAR 1:30 Now Simon’s mother-in-law was lying ill with a fever, and they at once told Jesus about her.
MAR 1:31 Jesus went up to her and, grasping her hand, raised her up; the fever left her, and she began to take care of them.
MAR 1:32 In the evening, after sunset, the people brought to Jesus all who were ill or possessed by demons;
MAR 1:33 and the whole city was gathered round the door.
MAR 1:34 Jesus cured many who were ill with various diseases, and drove out many demons, and would not permit them to speak, because they knew him to be the Christ.
MAR 1:35 In the morning, long before daylight, Jesus got up and went out to a lonely spot, where he began to pray.
MAR 1:36 But Simon and his companions went out searching for him;
MAR 1:37 and, when they found him, they exclaimed, ‘Everyone is looking for you!’
MAR 1:38 But Jesus said to them, ‘Let us go somewhere else, into the country towns nearby so that I can make my proclamation in them also; for that was why I came.’
MAR 1:39 And he went about making his proclamation in their synagogues all through Galilee, and driving out the demons.
MAR 1:40 One day a leper came to Jesus and, falling on his knees, begged him for help. ‘If only you are willing,’ he said, ‘you are able to make me clean.’
MAR 1:41 Moved with compassion, Jesus stretched out his hand and touched him, saying as he did so, ‘I am willing; become clean.’
MAR 1:42 Instantly the leprosy left the man, and he became clean;
MAR 1:43 and then Jesus, after sternly warning him, immediately sent him away,
MAR 1:44 and said to him, ‘Be careful not to say anything to anyone; but go and show yourself to the priest, and make the offerings for your cleansing directed by Moses, as evidence of your cure.’
MAR 1:45 The man, however, went away, and began to speak about it publicly, and to spread the story so widely, that Jesus could no longer go openly into a town, but stayed outside in lonely places; and people came to him from every direction.
MAR 2:1 Some days later, when Jesus came back to Capernaum, the news spread that he was in a house there;
MAR 2:2 and so many people collected together, that after a while there was no room for them even round the door; and he began to tell them his message.
MAR 2:3 Some people came, bringing to him a paralysed man, who was being carried by four of them.
MAR 2:4 They were unable to get him near to Jesus, because of the crowd, so they removed the roof above Jesus, and, when they had made an opening, they let down the mat on which the paralysed man was lying.
MAR 2:5 When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the man, ‘Child, your sins are forgiven.’
MAR 2:6 But some of the teachers of the Law who were sitting there were debating in their minds,
MAR 2:7 ‘Why does this man speak like this? He is blaspheming! Who can forgive sins except God?’
MAR 2:8 Jesus, at once intuitively aware that they were debating with themselves in this way, said to them, ‘Why are you debating in your minds about this?
MAR 2:9 Which is easier? – to say to the paralysed man, “Your sins are forgiven”? Or to say “Get up, and take up your mat, and walk”?
MAR 2:10 But so you may know that the Son of Man has power to forgive sins on earth’ – here he said to the paralysed man –
MAR 2:11 ‘To you I say, Get up, take up your mat, and return to your home.’
MAR 2:12 The man got up, and immediately took up his mat, and went out before them all; at which they were amazed, and, as they praised God, they said, ‘We have never seen anything like this!’
MAR 2:13 Jesus went out again to the sea; and all the people came to him, and he taught them.
MAR 2:14 As he went along, he saw Levi, the son of Alphaeus, sitting in the tax office, and said to him, ‘Follow me.’ Levi got up and followed him.
MAR 2:15 Later on he was in his house having dinner, and a number of tax collectors and outcasts took their places at the table with Jesus and his disciples; for many of them were following him.
MAR 2:16 When the teachers of the Law belonging to the party of the Pharisees saw that he was eating in the company of such people, they said to his disciples, ‘Why does he eat with the tax collectors and outcasts?’
MAR 2:17 Hearing this, Jesus said, ‘It is not those who are healthy who need a doctor, but those who are ill. I did not come to call the religious, but the outcast.’
MAR 2:18 Now John’s disciples and the Pharisees were fasting, and people came and asked Jesus, ‘Why is it that John’s disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, while yours do not?’
MAR 2:19 Jesus answered, ‘Can the groom’s friends fast, while the groom is with them? As long as they have the groom with them, they cannot fast.
MAR 2:20 But the days will come, when the groom will be taken away from them, and they will fast then – when that day comes.’
MAR 2:21 ‘No one ever sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment; if they do, the patch tears away from it – the new from the old – and a worse tear is made.
MAR 2:22 And no one ever puts new wine into old wine-skins; if they do, the wine will burst the skins, and both the wine and the skins are lost. But new wine is put into fresh skins.’
MAR 2:23 One Sabbath, as Jesus was walking through the cornfields, his disciples began to pick the ears of wheat as they went along.
MAR 2:24 ‘Look!’ the Pharisees said to him, ‘why are they doing what is not allowed on the Sabbath?’
MAR 2:25 ‘Have you never read,’ answered Jesus, ‘what David did when he was in need and hungry, he and his companions –
MAR 2:26 how he went into the house of God, in the time of Abiathar the high priest, and ate the consecrated bread, which only the priests are allowed to eat, and gave some to his comrades as well?’
MAR 2:27 Then Jesus added, ‘The Sabbath was made for people, and not people for the Sabbath;
MAR 2:28 so the Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath.’
MAR 3:1 On another occasion Jesus went in to a synagogue, where there was a man whose hand was withered.
MAR 3:2 And they watched Jesus closely, to see if he would cure the man on the Sabbath, so that they might have a charge to bring against him.
MAR 3:3 ‘Stand out in the middle,’ Jesus said to the man with the withered hand;
MAR 3:4 and to the people he said, ‘Is it allowable to do good at the Sabbath – or harm? To save a life, or destroy it?’
MAR 3:5 As they remained silent, Jesus looked round at them in anger, grieving at the hardness of their hearts, and said to the man, ‘Stretch out your hand.’ The man stretched it out; and his hand had become sound.
MAR 3:6 Immediately on leaving the synagogue, the Pharisees and the Herodians united in laying a plot against Jesus, to put him to death.
MAR 3:7 Then Jesus went away with his disciples to the sea, followed by a great number of people from Galilee.
MAR 3:8 A great number, hearing of all that he was doing, came to him from Judea, from Jerusalem, from Edom, from beyond the Jordan, and from the country round Tyre and Sidon.
MAR 3:9 So Jesus told his disciples to keep a small boat close by, so that the crowd would not crush him.
MAR 3:10 For he had cured many of them, and so people kept crowding around him, so all who were sick might touch him.
MAR 3:11 The foul spirits, too, whenever they caught sight of him, flung themselves down before him, and screamed out, ‘You are the Son of God’!
MAR 3:12 But he repeatedly warned them not to make him known.
MAR 3:13 Jesus made his way up the hill, and called those whom he wished; and they went to him.
MAR 3:14 He appointed twelve – whom he also named “apostles” – so that they might be with him, and that he might send them out as his messengers, to preach,
MAR 3:15 and with power to drive out demons.
MAR 3:16 So he appointed the Twelve – Peter (which was the name that Jesus gave to Simon),
MAR 3:17 James, the son of Zebedee, and his brother John (to whom he gave the name of Boanerges, which means the Thunderers),
MAR 3:18 Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus, Thaddaeus, Simon the Zealot,
MAR 3:19 and Judas Iscariot, the man who betrayed him.
MAR 3:20 Jesus went into a house; and again a crowd collected, so that they were not even able to eat their food.
MAR 3:21 When his relatives heard of it, they went to take charge of him, for they said that he was out of his mind.
MAR 3:22 The teachers of the Law, who had come down from Jerusalem, said, ‘He has Beelzebul in him! He drives the demons out by the help of their chief.’
MAR 3:23 So Jesus called them to him, and answered them in parables, ‘How can Satan drive out Satan?
MAR 3:24 When a kingdom is divided against itself, it cannot last;
MAR 3:25 and when a household is divided against itself, it will not be able to last.
MAR 3:26 So, if Satan is in revolt against himself and is divided, he cannot last – his end has come!
MAR 3:27 ‘No man who has broken into a strong man’s house can carry off his goods, without first tying him up; and not until then will he plunder his house.
MAR 3:28 I tell you that people will be forgiven everything – their sins, and all the slanders that they utter;
MAR 3:29 but whoever slanders the Holy Spirit remains unforgiven to the end; he has to answer for an enduring sin.’
MAR 3:30 This was said in reply to the charge that he had a foul spirit in him.
MAR 3:31 His mother and his brothers came, and stood outside, and sent to ask him to come to them.
MAR 3:32 There was a crowd sitting round Jesus, and some of them said to him, ‘Look, your mother and your brothers are outside, asking for you.’
MAR 3:33 ‘Who is my mother? And my brothers?’ was his reply.
MAR 3:34 Then he looked around on the people sitting in a circle round him, and said, ‘Here are my mother and my brothers!
MAR 3:35 Whoever does the will of God is my brother and sister and mother.’
MAR 4:1 Jesus again began to teach by the sea; and, as an immense crowd was gathering round him, he got into a boat, and sat in it on the sea, while all the people were on the shore at the water’s edge.
MAR 4:2 Then he taught them many truths in parables; and in the course of his teaching he said to them:
MAR 4:3 ‘Listen! The sower went out to sow;
MAR 4:4 and presently, as he was sowing, some of the seed fell along the path; and the birds came, and ate it up.
MAR 4:5 Some fell on rocky ground, where it had not much soil, and, because the soil wasn’t deep, sprang up at once;
MAR 4:6 but, when the sun rose, it was scorched, and, because their roots were not deep enough, withered away.
MAR 4:7 Some of the seed fell among brambles; but the brambles shot up and completely choked it, and it yielded no return.
MAR 4:8 Some fell into good soil, and, shooting up and growing, yielded a return, amounting to thirty, sixty, and even a hundred fold.’
MAR 4:9 And Jesus said, ‘Let anyone who has ears to hear with hear.’
MAR 4:10 Afterwards, when he was alone, his followers and the Twelve asked him about his parables;
MAR 4:11 and he said, ‘To you the hidden truth of the kingdom of God has been imparted; but to those who are outside it all teaching takes the form of parables so that –
MAR 4:12 “Though they have eyes, they may see without perceiving; and though they have ears, they may hear without understanding; otherwise some day they might turn and be forgiven.”’
MAR 4:13 ‘You do not know the meaning of this parable?’ he went on, ‘Then how will you understand all the other parables?
MAR 4:14 The sower sows the message.
MAR 4:15 The people meant by the seed that falls along the path are these – where the message is sown, but, as soon as they have heard it, Satan immediately comes and carries away the message that has been sown in them.
MAR 4:16 So, too, those meant by the seed sown on the rocky places are the people who, when they have heard the message, at once accept it joyfully;
MAR 4:17 but, as they have no root, they stand only for a short time; and so, when trouble or persecution arises because of the message, they fall away at once.
MAR 4:18 Those meant by the seed sown among the brambles are different; they are the people who hear the message,
MAR 4:19 but the cares of life, and the glamour of wealth, and cravings for many other things come in and completely choke the message, so that it gives no return.
MAR 4:20 But the people meant by the seed sown on the good ground are those who hear the message, and welcome it, and yield a return, thirty, sixty, and even a hundred fold.’
MAR 4:21 Jesus said to them, ‘Is a lamp brought to be put under a basket or under the couch, instead of being put on the lamp-stand?
MAR 4:22 There is nothing hidden that will not come to light and nothing is concealed that will not be brought into the open.
MAR 4:23 Let all who have ears to hear with hear.
MAR 4:24 ‘Take care what you listen to,’ said Jesus. ‘The standard you use will be used for you, and more will be added for you.
MAR 4:25 For, to those who have, more will be given; while, from those who have nothing, even what they have will be taken away.’
MAR 4:26 Jesus also said, ‘This is what the kingdom of God is like – like a man who has scattered seed on the ground,
MAR 4:27 and then sleeps by night and rises by day, while the seed is shooting up and growing – he knows not how.
MAR 4:28 The ground bears the crop of itself – first the blade, then the ear, and then the full grain in the ear;
MAR 4:29 but, as soon as the crop is ready, immediately he puts in the sickle because harvest has come.’
MAR 4:30 Jesus also said, ‘To what can we liken the kingdom of God?
MAR 4:31 By what can we illustrate it? Perhaps by the growth of a mustard seed. This seed, when sown in the ground, though it is smaller than all other seeds,
MAR 4:32 yet, when sown, shoots up, and becomes larger than any other herb, and puts out great branches, so that even the wild birds can roost in its shelter.’
MAR 4:33 With many such parables Jesus used to speak to the people of his message, as far as they were able to receive it;
MAR 4:34 and to them he never used to speak except in parables; but in private to his own disciples he explained everything.
MAR 4:35 In the evening of the same day, Jesus said to them, ‘Let us go across.’
MAR 4:36 So, leaving the crowd behind, they took him with them, just as he was, in the boat; and there were other boats with him.
MAR 4:37 A violent squall came on, and the waves kept dashing into the boat, so that the boat was actually filling.
MAR 4:38 Jesus was in the stern asleep on the cushion; and the disciples roused him and cried, ‘Teacher! Is it nothing to you that we are lost?’
MAR 4:39 Jesus rose and rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, ‘Hush! Be still!’ Then the wind dropped, and a great calm followed.
MAR 4:40 ‘Why are you so timid?’ he exclaimed. ‘Have you no faith yet?’
MAR 4:41 But they were struck with great awe, and said to one another, ‘Who can this be that even the wind and the sea obey him?’
MAR 5:1 They came to the other side of the sea – the region of the Gerasenes;
MAR 5:2 and, as soon as Jesus had got out of the boat, he met a man coming out of the tombs, who was under the power of a foul spirit,
MAR 5:3 and who made his home in the tombs. No one had ever been able to secure him, even with a chain;
MAR 5:4 for, though he had many times been left secured with fetters and chains, he had snapped the chains and broken the fetters to pieces, and no one could master him.
MAR 5:5 Night and day alike, he was continually shrieking in the tombs and among the hills, and cutting himself with stones.
MAR 5:6 Catching sight of Jesus from a distance, he ran and bowed to the ground before him,
MAR 5:7 shrieking out in a loud voice, ‘What do you want with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? For God’s sake do not torment me!’
MAR 5:8 For Jesus had said, ‘Come out from the man, you foul spirit.’
MAR 5:9 And he asked him, ‘What is your name?’ ‘My name,’ he said, ‘is Legion, for there are many of us;’
MAR 5:10 and he begged Jesus again and again not to send them away out of that country.
MAR 5:11 There was a large herd of pigs close by, feeding on the hillside;
MAR 5:12 and the spirits begged Jesus, ‘Send us into the pigs so that we can take possession of them.’
MAR 5:13 Jesus gave them leave. They came out, and entered into the pigs; and the herd – about two thousand in number – rushed down the steep slope into the sea and were drowned in the sea.
MAR 5:14 Then the men who tended them ran away, and carried the news to the town, and to the country round; and the people went to see what had happened.
MAR 5:15 When they came to Jesus, they found the possessed man sitting there, clothed and in his right mind – the man who had had the “Legion” in him – and they were awe-struck.
MAR 5:16 Then those who had seen it related to them all that had happened to the possessed man, as well as about the pigs;
MAR 5:17 so they began to beg Jesus to leave their region.
MAR 5:18 As Jesus was getting into the boat, the possessed man begged him to let him stay with him.
MAR 5:19 But Jesus refused. ‘Go back to your home, to your own people,’ he said, ‘and tell them of all that the Lord has done for you, and how he took pity on you.’
MAR 5:20 So the man went, and began to proclaim in the district of the Ten Towns all that Jesus had done for him; and everyone was amazed.
MAR 5:21 By the time Jesus had recrossed in the boat to the opposite shore, a great number of people had gathered to meet him, and were standing by the sea.
MAR 5:22 One of the leaders of the synagogue, whose name was Jairus, came and, as soon as he saw Jesus, threw himself at his feet and begged him repeatedly,
MAR 5:23 saying, ‘My little daughter is at death’s door. Please come and place your hands on her so that she may recover and live.’
MAR 5:24 So Jesus went with him. A great number of people followed Jesus, and kept pressing round him.
MAR 5:25 Meanwhile a woman who for twelve years had suffered from haemorrhage,
MAR 5:26 and undergone much at the hands of many doctors, (spending all she had without obtaining any relief, but, on the contrary, growing worse),
MAR 5:27 heard about Jesus, came behind in the crowd, and touched his cloak.
MAR 5:28 ‘If I can only touch his clothes,’ she said, ‘I will get well!’
MAR 5:29 At once her bleeding stopped, and she felt in herself that she was cured of her affliction.
MAR 5:30 Jesus at once became aware of the power that had gone out from him, and, turning round in the crowd, he said, ‘Who touched my clothes?’
MAR 5:31 ‘You see the people pressing round you,’ exclaimed his disciples, ‘and yet you say “Who touched me?”’
MAR 5:32 But Jesus looked about to see who had done it.
MAR 5:33 Then the woman, in fear and trembling, knowing what had happened to her, came and threw herself down before him, and told him the whole truth.
MAR 5:34 ‘Daughter,’ he said, ‘your faith has delivered you. Go, and peace be with you; be free from your affliction.’
MAR 5:35 Before he had finished speaking, some people from the house of the synagogue leader came and said, ‘Your daughter is dead! Why should you trouble the teacher further?’
MAR 5:36 But Jesus, overhearing what they were saying, said to the synagogue leader, ‘Do not be afraid; only have faith.’
MAR 5:37 And he allowed no one to accompany him, except Peter, James, and John, the brother of James.
MAR 5:38 Presently they reached the leader’s house, where Jesus saw a scene of confusion – people weeping and wailing incessantly.
MAR 5:39 ‘Why this confusion and weeping?’ he said on entering. ‘The little child is not dead; she is asleep.’
MAR 5:40 They began to laugh at him; but he sent them all out, and then, with the child’s father and mother and his companions, went into the room where she was lying.
MAR 5:41 Taking her hand, Jesus said to her, ‘Talitha, koum!’ – which means “little girl, I am speaking to you – Rise!”
MAR 5:42 The little girl stood up at once, and began to walk about; for she was twelve years old. And, as soon as they saw it, they were overwhelmed with amazement;
MAR 5:43 but Jesus repeatedly cautioned them not to let anyone know of it, and told them to give her something to eat.
MAR 6:1 On leaving that place, Jesus, followed by his disciples, went to his own part of the country.
MAR 6:2 When the Sabbath came, he began to teach in the synagogue; and the people, as they listened, were deeply impressed. ‘Where did he get this?’ they said, ‘and what is this wisdom that has been given him? And these miracles which he is doing?
MAR 6:3 Isn’t he the carpenter, the son of Mary, and the brother of James, and Joses, and Judas, and Simon? And aren’t his sisters, too, living here among us?’ This proved a hindrance to their believing in him;
MAR 6:4 at which Jesus said, ‘A prophet is not without honour, except in his home town, and among his own relatives, and in his own home.’
MAR 6:5 And he could not work any miracle there, beyond placing his hands on a few infirm persons, and curing them;
MAR 6:6 and he wondered at the want of faith shown by the people. Jesus went round the villages, one after another, teaching.
MAR 6:7 He called the Twelve to him, and began to send them out as his messengers, two and two, and gave them authority over foul spirits.
MAR 6:8 He instructed them to take nothing but a staff for the journey – not even bread, or a bag, or coins in their purse;
MAR 6:9 but they were to wear sandals, and not to put on a second coat.
MAR 6:10 ‘Whenever you go to stay at a house,’ he said, ‘remain there until you leave that place;
MAR 6:11 and if a place does not welcome you, or listen to you, as you go out of it shake off the dust that is on the soles of your feet, as a protest against them.’
MAR 6:12 So they set out, and proclaimed the need of repentance.
MAR 6:13 They drove out many demons, and anointed with oil many who were infirm, and cured them.
MAR 6:14 Now King Herod heard of Jesus; for his name had become well known. People were saying – ‘John the Baptiser must have risen from the dead, and that is why these miraculous powers are active in him.’
MAR 6:15 Others again said – ‘He is Elijah,’ and others – ‘He is a prophet, like one of the great prophets.’
MAR 6:16 But when Herod heard of him, he said – ‘The man whom I beheaded – John – he must be risen!’
MAR 6:17 For Herod himself had sent and arrested John, and put him in prison, in chains, to please Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip, because Herod had married her.
MAR 6:18 For John had said to Herod – ‘You have no right to be living with your brother’s wife.’
MAR 6:19 So Herodias was incensed against John, and wanted to put him to death, but was unable to do so,
MAR 6:20 because Herod stood in fear of John, knowing him to be an upright and holy man, and protected him. He had listened to John, but still remained much perplexed, and yet he found pleasure in listening to him.
MAR 6:21 A suitable opportunity, however, occurred when Herod, on his birthday, gave a dinner to his high officials, and his generals, and the foremost men in Galilee.
MAR 6:22 When his daughter – that is, the daughter of Herodias – came in and danced, she delighted Herod and those who were dining with him. ‘Ask me for whatever you like,’ the king said to the girl, ‘and I will give it to you’;
MAR 6:23 and he swore to her that he would give her whatever she asked him – up to half his kingdom.
MAR 6:24 The girl went out, and said to her mother ‘What must I ask for?’ ‘The head of John the Baptiser,’ answered her mother.
MAR 6:25 So she went in as quickly as possible to the king, and made her request. ‘I want you,’ she said, ‘to give me at once, on a dish, the head of John the Baptist.’
MAR 6:26 The king was much distressed; yet, because of his oath and of the guests at his table, he did not like to refuse her.
MAR 6:27 He immediately dispatched one of his bodyguard, with orders to bring John’s head. The man went and beheaded John in the prison,
MAR 6:28 and, bringing his head on a dish, gave it to the girl, and the girl gave it to her mother.
MAR 6:29 When John’s disciples heard of it, they came and took his body away, and laid it in a tomb.
MAR 6:30 When the apostles came back to Jesus, they told him all that they had done and all that they had taught.
MAR 6:31 ‘Come by yourselves privately to some lonely spot,’ he said, ‘and rest for a while’ – for there were so many people coming and going that they had not time even to eat.
MAR 6:32 So they set off privately in their boat for a lonely spot.
MAR 6:33 Many people saw them going, and recognised them, and from all the towns they flocked together to the place on foot, and got there before them.
MAR 6:34 On getting out of the boat, Jesus saw a great crowd, and his heart was moved at the sight of them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd; and he began to teach them many things.
MAR 6:35 When it grew late, his disciples came up to him, and said, ‘This is a lonely spot, and it is already late.
MAR 6:36 Send the people away, so that they may go to the farms and villages around and buy themselves something to eat.’
MAR 6:37 But Jesus answered, ‘It is for you to give them something to eat.’ ‘Are we to go and spend almost a year’s wages on bread,’ they asked, ‘to give them to eat?’
MAR 6:38 ‘How many loaves have you?’ he asked, ‘Go, and see.’ When they had found out, they told him, ‘Five, and two fish.’
MAR 6:39 Jesus directed them to make all the people take their seats on the green grass, in parties;
MAR 6:40 and they sat down in groups – in hundreds, and in fifties.
MAR 6:41 Taking the five loaves and the two fish, Jesus looked up to heaven, and said the blessing; he broke the loaves into pieces, and gave them to his disciples for them to serve out to the people, and he divided the two fish also among them all.
MAR 6:42 Everyone had sufficient to eat;
MAR 6:43 and they picked up enough broken pieces to fill twelve baskets, as well as some of the fish.
MAR 6:44 The people who ate the bread were five thousand in number.
MAR 6:45 Immediately afterwards Jesus made his disciples get into the boat, and cross over in advance, in the direction of Bethsaida, while he himself was dismissing the crowd.
MAR 6:46 After he had taken leave of the people, he went away up the hill to pray.
MAR 6:47 When evening fell, the boat was out in the middle of the sea, and Jesus was on the shore alone.
MAR 6:48 Seeing them labouring at the oars – for the wind was against them – about three hours after midnight Jesus came towards them, walking on the water, intending to join them.
MAR 6:49 But, when they saw him walking on the water, they thought it was a ghost, and cried out;
MAR 6:50 for all of them saw him, and were terrified. But Jesus at once spoke to them. ‘Courage!’ he said, ‘it is I; do not be afraid!’
MAR 6:51 Then he got into the boat with them, and the wind dropped. The disciples were utterly amazed,
MAR 6:52 for they had not understood about the loaves, their minds being slow to learn.
MAR 6:53 When they had crossed over, they landed at Gennesaret, and moored the boat.
MAR 6:54 But they had no sooner left her than the people, recognising Jesus,
MAR 6:55 hurried over the whole countryside, and began to carry about on mats those who were ill, wherever they heard he was.
MAR 6:56 So wherever he went – to villages, or towns, or farms – they would lay their sick in the market-places, begging him to let them touch only the tassel of his cloak; and all who touched were made well.
MAR 7:1 One day the Pharisees and some of the teachers of the Law who had come from Jerusalem gathered round Jesus.
MAR 7:2 They had noticed that some of his disciples ate their food with their hands “defiled,” by which they meant unwashed.
MAR 7:3 (For the Pharisees, and indeed all strict Jews, will not eat without first scrupulously washing their hands, holding in this to the traditions of their ancestors.
MAR 7:4 When they come from market, they will not eat without first sprinkling themselves; and there are many other customs which they have inherited and hold to, such as the ceremonial washing of cups, and jugs, and copper pans).
MAR 7:5 So the Pharisees and the teachers of the Law asked Jesus this question – ‘How is it that your disciples do not follow the traditions of our ancestors, but eat their food with defiled hands?’
MAR 7:6 His answer was, ‘It was well said by Isaiah when he prophesied about you hypocrites in the words – “This is a people who honour me with their lips, while their hearts are far removed from me;
MAR 7:7 but vainly do they worship me, For they teach but human precepts.”
MAR 7:8 You neglect God’s commandments and hold to human traditions.
MAR 7:9 Wisely do you set aside God’s commandments,’ he exclaimed, ‘to keep your own traditions!
MAR 7:10 For while Moses said “Honour your father and your mother,” and “Let anyone who abuses their father or mother suffer death,”
MAR 7:11 you say “If a person says to their father or mother ‘Whatever of mine might have been of service to you is Corban’” (which means “Set apart for God”) –
MAR 7:12 why, then you do not allow them to do anything further for their father or mother!
MAR 7:13 In this way you nullify the words of God by your traditions, which you hand down; and you do many similar things.’
MAR 7:14 Then Jesus called the people to him again, and said, ‘Listen to me, all of you, and mark my words.
MAR 7:15 There is nothing external to a person, which by going into them can defile them; but the things that come out of a person are the things that defile them.’
MAR 7:16 
MAR 7:17 When Jesus went indoors, away from the crowd, his disciples began questioning him about this saying.
MAR 7:18 ‘What, do even you understand so little?’ exclaimed Jesus. ‘Don’t you see that there is nothing external to a person, which by going into a person, can defile them,
MAR 7:19 because it does not pass into his heart, but into his stomach, and is afterwards got rid of?’ – in saying this Jesus pronounced all food clean.
MAR 7:20 ‘It is what comes out from a person,’ he added, ‘that defiles them,
MAR 7:21 for it is from within, out of the hearts of people, that there come evil thoughts – sexual immorality, theft, murder, adultery,
MAR 7:22 greed, wickedness, deceit, indecency, envy, slander, haughtiness, folly;
MAR 7:23 all these wicked things come from within, and do defile a person.’
MAR 7:24 On leaving that place, Jesus went to the district of Tyre and Sidon. He went into a house, and did not wish anyone to know it, but could not escape notice.
MAR 7:25 For a woman, whose little daughter had a foul spirit in her, heard of him immediately, and came and threw herself at his feet –
MAR 7:26 the woman was a foreigner, from Syrian Phoenicia – and she begged him to drive the demon out of her daughter.
MAR 7:27 ‘Let the children be satisfied first,’ answered Jesus. ‘For it is not fair to take the children’s food, and throw it to dogs.’
MAR 7:28 ‘Yes, Master,’ she replied. ‘Even the dogs under the table do feed on the children’s crumbs.’
MAR 7:29 ‘For saying that,’ he answered, ‘you may go. The demon has gone out of your daughter.’
MAR 7:30 The woman went home, and found the child lying on her bed, and the demon gone.
MAR 7:31 On returning from the district of Tyre, Jesus went, by way of Sidon, to the Sea of Galilee, across the district of the Ten Towns.
MAR 7:32 Some people brought to him a man who was deaf and almost dumb, and they begged Jesus to place his hand on him.
MAR 7:33 Jesus took him aside from the crowd quietly, put his fingers into the man’s ears, and touched his tongue with saliva.
MAR 7:34 Then, looking up to heaven, he sighed, and said to the man, ‘Ephphatha!’ which means “Be opened.”
MAR 7:35 The man’s ears were opened, the string of his tongue was freed, and he began to talk plainly.
MAR 7:36 Jesus insisted on their not telling anyone; but the more he insisted, the more perseveringly they made it known,
MAR 7:37 and a profound impression was made on the people. ‘He has done everything well!’ they exclaimed. ‘He makes even the deaf hear and the dumb speak!’
MAR 8:1 About that time, when there was again a great crowd of people who had nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples to him, and said,
MAR 8:2 ‘My heart is moved at the sight of all these people, for they have already been with me three days and they have nothing to eat;
MAR 8:3 and if I send them away to their homes hungry, they will break down on the way; and some of them have come a long distance.’
MAR 8:4 ‘Where will it be possible,’ his disciples answered, ‘to get sufficient bread for these people in this lonely place?’
MAR 8:5 ‘How many loaves have you?’ he asked. ‘Seven,’ they answered.
MAR 8:6 Jesus told the crowd to sit down on the ground. Then he took the seven loaves, and, after saying the thanksgiving, broke them, and gave them to his disciples to serve out; and they served them out to the crowd.
MAR 8:7 They had also a few small fish; and, after he had said the blessing, he told the disciples to serve out these as well.
MAR 8:8 The people had sufficient to eat, and they picked up seven baskets full of the broken pieces that were left.
MAR 8:9 There were about four thousand people. Then Jesus dismissed them.
MAR 8:10 Immediately afterwards, getting into the boat with his disciples, Jesus went to the district of Dalmanutha.
MAR 8:11 Here the Pharisees came out, and began to argue with Jesus, asking him for some sign from the heavens, to test him.
MAR 8:12 Sighing deeply, Jesus said, ‘Why does this generation ask for a sign? I tell you, no sign will be given it.’
MAR 8:13 So he left them to themselves, and, getting into the boat again, went away to the opposite shore.
MAR 8:14 Now the disciples had forgotten to take any bread with them, one loaf being all that they had in the boat.
MAR 8:15 So Jesus gave them this warning. ‘Take care,’ he said, ‘beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.’
MAR 8:16 They began talking to one another about their being short of bread;
MAR 8:17 and, noticing this, Jesus said to them, ‘Why are you talking about your being short of bread? Don’t you yet see or understand? Are your minds still so slow of comprehension?
MAR 8:18 Though you have eyes, do you not see? And though you have ears, do you not hear? Don’t you remember,
MAR 8:19 when I broke up the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets of broken pieces you picked up?’ ‘Twelve,’ they said.
MAR 8:20 ‘And when the seven for the four thousand, how many basketfuls of broken pieces did you pick up?’ ‘Seven,’ they said.
MAR 8:21 ‘Don’t you understand now?’ he repeated.
MAR 8:22 They came to Bethsaida. There some people brought a blind man to Jesus, and begged him to touch him.
MAR 8:23 Taking the blind man’s hand, Jesus led him to the outskirts of the village, and, when he had put saliva on the man’s eyes, he placed his hands on him, and asked him, ‘Do you see anything?’
MAR 8:24 The man looked up, and said, ‘I see the people, for, as they walk about, they look to me like trees.’
MAR 8:25 Then Jesus again placed his hands on the man’s eyes; and the man saw clearly, his sight was restored, and he saw everything with perfect distinctness.
MAR 8:26 Jesus sent him to his home, and said, ‘Do not go even into the village.’
MAR 8:27 Afterwards Jesus and his disciples went into the villages round Caesarea Philippi; and on the way he asked his disciples this question – ‘Who do people say that I am?’
MAR 8:28 ‘John the Baptist,’ they answered, ‘but others say Elijah, while others say one of the prophets.’
MAR 8:29 ‘But you,’ he asked, ‘who do you say that I am?’ To this Peter replied, ‘You are the Christ.’
MAR 8:30 At which Jesus charged them not to say this about him to anyone.
MAR 8:31 Then he began to teach them that the Son of Man must undergo much suffering, and that he must be rejected by the elders, and the chief priests, and the teachers of the Law, and be put to death, and rise again after three days.
MAR 8:32 He said all this quite openly. But Peter took Jesus aside, and began to rebuke him.
MAR 8:33 Jesus, however, turning round and seeing his disciples, rebuked Peter. ‘Out of my sight, Satan!’ he exclaimed. ‘For you look at things, not as God does, but as people do.’
MAR 8:34 Calling the people and his disciples to him, Jesus said, ‘If anyone wishes to walk in my steps, they must renounce self, take up their cross, and follow me.
MAR 8:35 For whoever wishes to save their life will lose it, and whoever, for my sake and for the sake of the good news, will lose their life will save it.
MAR 8:36 What good is it to a person to gain the whole world and forfeit their life?
MAR 8:37 For what could a person give that is of equal value with their life?
MAR 8:38 Whoever is ashamed of me and of my teaching, in this unfaithful and wicked generation, of them will the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in his Father’s glory with the holy angels.’
MAR 9:1 ‘I tell you,’ he added, ‘that some of those who are standing here will not know death until they have seen the kingdom of God come in power.’
MAR 9:2 Six days later, Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John, and led them up a high mountain alone by themselves. There his appearance was transformed before their eyes,
MAR 9:3 and his clothes became whiter than any launderer in the whole world could bleach them.
MAR 9:4 And Elijah appeared to them, in company with Moses; and they were talking with Jesus.
MAR 9:5 ‘Rabbi,’ said Peter, interposing, ‘it is good to be here; let us make three tents, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.’
MAR 9:6 For he did not know what to say, because they were much afraid.
MAR 9:7 Then a cloud came down and enveloped them; and from the cloud there came a voice – ‘This is my dearly loved son; listen to him.’
MAR 9:8 And suddenly, on looking round, they saw that there was now no one with them but Jesus alone.
MAR 9:9 As they were going down the mountainside, Jesus cautioned them not to relate what they had seen to anyone, until after the Son of Man had risen from the dead.
MAR 9:10 They seized on these words and discussed with one another what this “rising from the dead” meant.
MAR 9:11 ‘How is it,’ they asked Jesus, ‘that our teachers of the Law say that Elijah has to come first?’
MAR 9:12 ‘Elijah does indeed come first,’ answered Jesus, ‘and re-establish everything; and does not scripture speak, with regard to the Son of Man, of his undergoing much suffering and being utterly despised?
MAR 9:13 But I tell you that Elijah has come, and people have treated him just as they pleased, as scripture says of him.’
MAR 9:14 When they came to the other disciples, they saw a great crowd round them, and some teachers of the Law arguing with them.
MAR 9:15 But, as soon as they saw Jesus, all the people, in great astonishment, ran up and greeted him.
MAR 9:16 ‘What are you arguing about with them?’ Jesus asked.
MAR 9:17 ‘Teacher,’ answered a man in the crowd, ‘I brought my son to see you, as he has a spirit in him that makes him mute;
MAR 9:18 and, wherever it seizes him, it dashes him down; he foams at the mouth and grinds his teeth, and he is pining away. I asked your disciples to drive the spirit out, but they failed.’
MAR 9:19 ‘Faithless generation!’ exclaimed Jesus. ‘How long must I be with you? How long must I have patience with you? Bring the boy to me.’
MAR 9:20 They brought him to Jesus; but no sooner did the boy see him than the spirit threw him into convulsions; and he fell on the ground, and rolled about, foaming at the mouth.
MAR 9:21 ‘How long has he been like this?’ Jesus asked the boy’s father.
MAR 9:22 ‘From his childhood,’ he answered. ‘It has often thrown him into fire and into water to put an end to his life; but, if you can possibly do anything, take pity on us, and help us!’
MAR 9:23 ‘Why say “possibly”?’ Jesus replied. ‘Everything is possible for one who has faith.’
MAR 9:24 The boy’s father immediately cried out, ‘I have faith; help my want of faith!’
MAR 9:25 But, when Jesus saw that a crowd was quickly collecting, he rebuked the foul spirit, ‘Deaf and dumb spirit, it is I who command you. Come out from him and never enter him again.’
MAR 9:26 With a loud cry the spirit threw the boy into repeated convulsions, and then came out from him. The boy looked like a corpse, so that most of them said that he was dead.
MAR 9:27 But Jesus took his hand, and lifted him; and he stood up.
MAR 9:28 When Jesus had gone indoors, his disciples asked him privately, ‘Why couldn’t we drive it out?’
MAR 9:29 ‘A spirit of this kind,’ he said, ‘can be driven out only by prayer.’
MAR 9:30 Leaving that place, Jesus and his disciples went on their way through Galilee; but he did not wish anyone to know it,
MAR 9:31 for he was instructing his disciples, and telling them – ‘The Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of his fellow men, and they will put him to death, but, when he has been put to death, he will rise again after three days.’
MAR 9:32 But the disciples did not understand his meaning and were afraid to question him.
MAR 9:33 They came to Capernaum. When Jesus had gone into the house, he asked them, ‘What were you discussing on the way?’
MAR 9:34 But they were silent; for on the way they had been arguing with one another which was the greatest.
MAR 9:35 Sitting down, Jesus called the Twelve and said, ‘If anyone wishes to be first, he must be last of all, and servant of all.’
MAR 9:36 Then Jesus took a little child, and placed it in the middle of them. Taking it in his arms, he said to them,
MAR 9:37 ‘Anyone who, for the sake of my name, welcomes even a little child like this is welcoming me, and anyone who welcomes me is welcoming not me, but him who sent me as his messenger.’
MAR 9:38 ‘Teacher,’ said John, ‘we saw a man driving out demons by using your name, and we tried to prevent him, because he did not follow us.’
MAR 9:39 ‘None of you must prevent the man,’ answered Jesus, ‘for no one will use my name in working a miracle, and yet find it easy to speak evil of me.
MAR 9:40 He who is not against us is for us.
MAR 9:41 If anyone gives you a cup of water because you belong to Christ, I tell you, he will assuredly not lose his reward.
MAR 9:42 ‘And, if anyone puts temptation in the way of one of these little ones who believe in me, it would be far better for him if he had been thrown into the sea with a great millstone round his neck.
MAR 9:43 If your hand causes you to sin, cut it off. It would be better for you to enter life maimed, than to have both your hands and go into Gehenna, into the fire that cannot be put out.
MAR 9:44 
MAR 9:45 If your foot causes you to sin, cut it off. It would be better for you to enter life lame, than to have both your feet and be thrown into Gehenna.
MAR 9:46 
MAR 9:47 If your eye causes you to sin, tear it out. It would be better for you to enter the kingdom of God with only one eye, than to have both eyes and be thrown into Gehenna,
MAR 9:48 where their worm does not die, and the fire is not put out.
MAR 9:49 For it is by fire that everyone will be salted.
MAR 9:50 Salt is good, but, if the salt should lose its saltiness, what will you use to season it? You must have salt in yourselves, and live at peace with one another.’
MAR 10:1 On leaving that place, Jesus went into the district of Judea on the other side of the Jordan. Crowds gathered about him again; and again, as usual, he began teaching them.
MAR 10:2 Presently some Pharisees came up and, to test him, asked, ‘Has a husband the right to divorce his wife?’
MAR 10:3 ‘What direction did Moses give you?’ replied Jesus.
MAR 10:4 ‘Moses,’ they said, ‘permitted a man to draw up in writing a notice of separation and divorce his wife.’
MAR 10:5 ‘It was owing to the hardness of your hearts,’ said Jesus, ‘that Moses gave you this direction;
MAR 10:6 but, at the beginning of the Creation, “God made them male and female.”
MAR 10:7 “For this reason a man will leave his father and mother,
MAR 10:8 and the man and his wife will become one;” so that they are no longer two, but one.
MAR 10:9 What God himself, then, has yoked together no one must separate.’
MAR 10:10 When they were indoors, the disciples asked him again about this,
MAR 10:11 and he said, ‘Anyone who divorces his wife and marries another woman is guilty of adultery against his wife;
MAR 10:12 and, if the woman divorces her husband and marries another man, she is guilty of adultery.’
MAR 10:13 Some of the people were bringing little children to Jesus, for him to touch them; but the disciples rebuked those who had brought them.
MAR 10:14 When, however, Jesus saw this, he was indignant. ‘Let the little children come to me,’ he said, ‘do not hinder them; for it is to the childlike that the kingdom of God belongs.
MAR 10:15 I tell you, unless a person receives the kingdom of God like a child, they will not enter it at all.’
MAR 10:16 Then he embraced the children, and, placing his hands on them, gave them his blessing.
MAR 10:17 As Jesus was resuming his journey, a man came running up to him, and threw himself on his knees before him. ‘Good teacher,’ he asked, ‘what must I do to gain eternal life?’
MAR 10:18 ‘Why do you call me good?’ answered Jesus. ‘No one is good but God.
MAR 10:19 You know the commandments – “Do not kill. Do not commit adultery. Do not steal. Do not say what is false about others. Do not cheat. Honour your father and your mother.”’
MAR 10:20 ‘Teacher,’ he replied, ‘I have observed all these from my childhood.’
MAR 10:21 Jesus looked at the man, and his heart went out to him, and he said, ‘There is still one thing wanting in you; go and sell all that you have, and give to the poor, and you will have wealth in heaven; then come and follow me.’
MAR 10:22 But the man’s face clouded at these words, and he went away distressed, for he had great possessions.
MAR 10:23 Then Jesus looked round, and said to his disciples, ‘How hard it will be for people of wealth to enter the kingdom of God!’
MAR 10:24 The disciples were amazed at his words. But Jesus said again, ‘My children, how hard a thing it is to enter the kingdom of God!
MAR 10:25 It is easier for a camel to get through a needle’s eye, than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.’
MAR 10:26 ‘Then who can be saved?’ they exclaimed in the greatest astonishment.
MAR 10:27 Jesus looked at them, and answered, ‘With people it is impossible, but not with God; for everything is possible with God.’
MAR 10:28 ‘But we,’ began Peter, ‘we left everything and have followed you.’
MAR 10:29 ‘I tell you,’ said Jesus, ‘there is no one who has left house, or brothers, or sisters, or mother, or father, or children, or land, for my sake and for the good news,
MAR 10:30 who will not receive a hundred times as much, even now in the present – houses, and brothers, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and land, though not without persecutions – and in the age that is coming, eternal life.
MAR 10:31 But many who are first now will then be last, and the last will be first.’
MAR 10:32 They were on the road going up to Jerusalem, with Jesus walking in front of them. The disciples were filled with awe, while those who were following behind were overwhelmed with fear. Gathering the Twelve round him once more, Jesus began to tell them what was about to happen to him.
MAR 10:33 ‘Listen!’ he said. ‘We are going up to Jerusalem; and there the Son of Man will be betrayed to the chief priests and the teachers of the Law, and they will condemn him to death, and they will give him up to the Gentiles,
MAR 10:34 who will mock him, spit on him, and scourge him, and put him to death; and after three days he will rise again.’
MAR 10:35 James and John, the two sons of Zebedee, went to Jesus, and said, ‘Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we ask.’
MAR 10:36 ‘What do you want me to do for you?’ he asked.
MAR 10:37 ‘Grant us this,’ they answered, ‘to sit, one on your right, and the other on your left, when you come in glory.’
MAR 10:38 ‘You do not know what you are asking,’ Jesus said to them. ‘Can you drink the cup that I am to drink? Or receive the baptism that I am to receive?’
MAR 10:39 ‘Yes,’ they answered, ‘we can.’ ‘You will indeed drink the cup that I am to drink,’ Jesus said, ‘and receive the baptism that I am to receive,
MAR 10:40 but as to a seat at my right or at my left – that is not mine to give, but it is for those for whom it has been prepared.’
MAR 10:41 On hearing of this, the ten others were at first very indignant about James and John.
MAR 10:42 But Jesus called the ten to him, and said, ‘Those who are regarded as ruling among the Gentiles lord it over them, as you know, and their great men oppress them.
MAR 10:43 But among you it is not so. No, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant,
MAR 10:44 and whoever wants to take the first place among you must be the servant of all;
MAR 10:45 for even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.’
MAR 10:46 They came to Jericho. When Jesus was going out of the town with his disciples and a large crowd, Bartimaeus, the son of Timaeus, a blind beggar, was sitting by the roadside.
MAR 10:47 Hearing that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to call out, ‘Jesus, Son of David, take pity on me.’
MAR 10:48 Many of the people kept telling him to be quiet; but the man continued to call out all the louder, ‘Son of David, take pity on me.’
MAR 10:49 Then Jesus stopped. ‘Call him,’ he said. So they called the blind man. ‘Have courage!’ they exclaimed. ‘Get up; he is calling you.’
MAR 10:50 The man threw off his cloak, sprang up, and came to Jesus.
MAR 10:51 ‘What do you want me to do for you?’ said Jesus, addressing him. ‘Rabboni,’ the blind man answered, ‘I want to recover my sight.’
MAR 10:52 ‘You may go,’ Jesus said, ‘Your faith has delivered you.’ Immediately he recovered his sight, and began to follow Jesus along the road.
MAR 11:1 When they had almost reached Jerusalem, as far as Bethphage and Bethany, near the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent on two of his disciples.
MAR 11:2 ‘Go to the village facing you,’ he said, ‘and, as soon as you get there, you will find a foal tethered, which no one has ever ridden; untie it, and bring it.
MAR 11:3 And, if anyone says to you “Why are you doing that?”, say “The Master wants it, and will be sure to send it back here at once.”’
MAR 11:4 The two disciples went, and, finding a foal tethered outside a door in the street, they untied it.
MAR 11:5 Some of the bystanders said to them, ‘What are you doing, untying the foal?’
MAR 11:6 And the two disciples answered as Jesus had told them; and they allowed them to go.
MAR 11:7 Then they brought the foal to Jesus, and, when they had laid their cloaks on it, he seated himself on it.
MAR 11:8 Many of the people spread their cloaks on the road, while some strewed boughs which they had cut from the fields;
MAR 11:9 and those who led the way, as well as those who followed, kept shouting, ‘God save him! Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord!
MAR 11:10 Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David! God save him from on high!’
MAR 11:11 Jesus entered Jerusalem, and went into the Temple Courts; and, after looking round at everything, as it was already late, he went out to Bethany with the Twelve.
MAR 11:12 The next day, after they had left Bethany, Jesus became hungry;
MAR 11:13 and, noticing a fig tree at a distance in leaf, he went to it to see if by any chance he could find something on it; but, on coming up to it, he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season for figs.
MAR 11:14 So, addressing the tree, he exclaimed, ‘May no one ever again eat of your fruit!’ And his disciples heard what he said.
MAR 11:15 They came to Jerusalem. Jesus went into the Temple Courts, and began to drive out those who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers, and the seats of the pigeon-dealers,
MAR 11:16 and would not allow anyone to carry anything across the Temple Courts.
MAR 11:17 Then he began to teach. ‘Does not scripture say,’ he asked, ‘“My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations”? But you have made it a den of robbers.’
MAR 11:18 Now the chief priests and the teachers of the Law heard this and began to look for some way of putting Jesus to death; for they were afraid of him, since all the people were greatly impressed by his teaching.
MAR 11:19 As soon as evening fell, Jesus and his disciples went out of the city.
MAR 11:20 As they passed by early in the morning, they noticed that the fig tree was withered up from the roots.
MAR 11:21 Then Peter recalled what had occurred. ‘Look, Rabbi,’ he exclaimed, ‘the fig tree which you doomed is withered up!’
MAR 11:22 ‘Have faith in God!’ replied Jesus.
MAR 11:23 ‘I tell you that if anyone should say to this hill “Be lifted up and hurled into the sea!”, without ever a doubt in his mind, but in the faith that what he says will be done, he would find that it would be.
MAR 11:24 And therefore I say to you “Have faith that whatever you ask for in prayer is already granted you, and you will find that it will be.”
MAR 11:25 ‘And, whenever you stand up to pray, forgive any grievance that you have against anyone, so that your Father who is in heaven also may forgive you your offences.’
MAR 11:26 
MAR 11:27 They came to Jerusalem again. While Jesus was walking about in the Temple Courts, the chief priests, the teachers of the Law, and the elders came up to him.
MAR 11:28 ‘What authority have you to do these things?’ they said. ‘Who gave you the authority to do them?’
MAR 11:29 ‘I will put one question to you,’ said Jesus. ‘Answer me that, and then I will tell you what authority I have to act as I do.
MAR 11:30 It is about John’s baptism. Was it of divine or human origin? Answer me that.’
MAR 11:31 They began arguing together. ‘If we say “divine,” he will say “Why then didn’t you believe him?”
MAR 11:32 Yet can we say “human”?’ They were afraid of the people, for everyone regarded John as undoubtedly a prophet.
MAR 11:33 So their answer to Jesus was – ‘We do not know.’ ‘Then I,’ replied Jesus, ‘refuse to tell you what authority I have to do these things.’
MAR 12:1 Jesus began to speak to them in parables, ‘A man once planted a vineyard, put a fence round it, dug a wine-press, built a tower, and then let it out to tenants and went abroad.
MAR 12:2 At the proper time he sent a servant to the tenants, to receive from them a share of the produce of the grape harvest;
MAR 12:3 but they seized him, and beat him, and sent him away empty-handed.
MAR 12:4 A second time the owner sent a servant to them; this man, too, the tenants struck on the head, and insulted.
MAR 12:5 He sent another, but him they killed; and so with many others – some they beat and some they killed.
MAR 12:6 He had still one son, who was very dear to him; and him he sent to them last of all. “They will respect my son,” he said.
MAR 12:7 But those tenants said to one another “Here is the heir! Come, let us kill him, and his inheritance will be ours.”
MAR 12:8 So they seized him, and killed him, and threw his body outside the vineyard.
MAR 12:9 What will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and put the tenants to death, and he will let the vineyard to others.
MAR 12:10 ‘Have you never read this passage of scripture? – “The stone which the builders despised has now itself become the cornerstone;
MAR 12:11 this cornerstone has come from the Lord, and is marvellous in our eyes.”’
MAR 12:12 After this his enemies were eager to arrest him, but they were afraid of the crowd; for they saw that it was at them that he had aimed the parable. So they left him alone, and went away.
MAR 12:13 Afterwards they sent to Jesus some of the Pharisees and Herodians, to set a trap for him in the course of conversation.
MAR 12:14 These men came to him and said, ‘Teacher, we know that you are an honest man, and are not afraid of anyone, for you pay no regard to a person’s position, but teach the way of God honestly; are we right in paying taxes to the Emperor, or not?
MAR 12:15 Should we pay, or should we not pay?’ Knowing their hypocrisy, Jesus said to them, ‘Why are you testing me? Bring me a coin to look at.’
MAR 12:16 And, when they had brought it, he asked, ‘Whose head and title are these?’ ‘The Emperor’s,’ they said;
MAR 12:17 and Jesus replied, ‘Pay to the Emperor what belongs to the Emperor, and to God what belongs to God.’ And they were amazed at him.
MAR 12:18 Next came some Sadducees – the men who maintain that there is no resurrection. Their question was this –
MAR 12:19 ‘Teacher, in our scriptures Moses decreed that, should a man’s brother die, leaving a widow but no child, the man should take the widow as his wife, and raise up a family for his brother.
MAR 12:20 There were once seven brothers. The eldest married, but died and left no family;
MAR 12:21 and the second married his widow, and died without family; and so did the third.
MAR 12:22 All the seven died and left no family. The woman herself died last of all.
MAR 12:23 At the resurrection whose wife will she be, all seven brothers having had her as their wife?’
MAR 12:24 ‘Is not the reason of your mistake,’ answered Jesus, ‘your ignorance of the scriptures and of the power of God?
MAR 12:25 When people rise from the dead, there is no marrying or being married; but they are as angels in heaven.
MAR 12:26 ‘As to the dead, and the fact that they rise, have you never read in the book of Moses, in the passage about the Bush, how God spoke to him saying – “I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob”?
MAR 12:27 He is not God of dead people, but of living. You are greatly mistaken.’
MAR 12:28 Then came up one of the teachers of the Law who had heard their discussions. Knowing that Jesus had answered them wisely, he asked him this question, ‘Which commandment is the most important of all?’
MAR 12:29 ‘The most important,’ answered Jesus, ‘is – “Hear, Israel; the Lord our God is the one Lord;
MAR 12:30 and you must love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind, and with all your strength.”
MAR 12:31 The second is this – “You must love your neighbour as you love yourself.” There is no commandment greater than these.’
MAR 12:32 ‘Wisely answered, teacher!’ exclaimed the teacher of the Law. ‘It is true, as you say, that there is one God, and that there is no other besides him;
MAR 12:33 and to love him with all one’s heart, and with all one’s understanding, and with all one’s strength, and to love one’s neighbour as one loves oneself is far beyond all burnt offerings and sacrifices.’
MAR 12:34 Seeing that he had answered with discernment, Jesus said to him, ‘You are not far from the kingdom of God.’ After that no one ventured to question him further.
MAR 12:35 While Jesus was teaching in the Temple Courts, he asked, ‘How is it that the teachers of the Law say that the Christ is to be David’s son?
MAR 12:36 David said himself, speaking under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit – “The Lord said to my lord: Sit at my right hand, until I put your enemies beneath your feet.”
MAR 12:37 David himself calls him “lord,” how comes it, then, that he is to be his son?’ The mass of the people listened to Jesus with delight.
MAR 12:38 In the course of his teaching, Jesus said, ‘See that you are on your guard against the teachers of the Law, who delight to walk about in long robes, and to be greeted in the streets with respect,
MAR 12:39 and to have the best seats in the synagogues, and places of honour at dinner.
MAR 12:40 They are the men who rob widows of their homes, and make a pretence of saying long prayers. Their sentence will be all the heavier.’
MAR 12:41 Then Jesus sat down opposite the chests for the Temple offerings, and watched how the people put money into them. Many rich people were putting in large sums;
MAR 12:42 but one poor widow came and put in two small coins, worth very little.
MAR 12:43 Then, calling his disciples to him, Jesus said, ‘I tell you that this poor widow has put in more than all the others who were putting money into the chests;
MAR 12:44 for everyone else put in something from what he had to spare, while she, in her need, put in all she had – everything that she had to live on.’
MAR 13:1 As Jesus was walking out of the Temple Courts, one of his disciples said to him, ‘Teacher, look what fine stones and buildings these are!’
MAR 13:2 ‘Do you see these great buildings?’ asked Jesus. ‘Not a single stone will be left here on another, which will not be thrown down.’
MAR 13:3 When Jesus had sat down on the Mount of Olives, facing the Temple, Peter, James, John and Andrew questioned him privately,
MAR 13:4 ‘Tell us when this will be, and what will be the sign when all this is drawing to its close.’
MAR 13:5 Then Jesus began, ‘See that no one leads you astray.
MAR 13:6 Many will take my name, and come saying “I am He”, and will lead many astray.
MAR 13:7 ‘And, when you hear of wars and rumours of wars, do not be alarmed; such things must occur; but the end is not yet.
MAR 13:8 For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; there will be earthquakes in various places; there will be famines. This will be but the beginning of the birth-pangs.
MAR 13:9 ‘See to yourselves! They will betray you to courts of law; and you will be taken to synagogues and beaten; and you will be brought up before governors and kings for my sake, so that you can bear witness before them.
MAR 13:10 But the good news must first be proclaimed to every nation.
MAR 13:11 Whenever they betray you and hand you over for trial, do not be anxious beforehand as to what you will say, but say whatever is given you at the moment; for it will not be you who speak, but the Holy Spirit.
MAR 13:12 Brother will betray brother to death, and the father his child; and children will turn against their parents, and cause them to be put to death;
MAR 13:13 and you will be hated by everyone because of me. Yet the person who endures to the end will be saved.
MAR 13:14 ‘As soon, however, as you see “the Foul Desecration” standing where it ought not’ (the reader must consider what this means) ‘then those of you who are in Judea must take refuge in the mountains;
MAR 13:15 and a person on the house-top must not go down, or go in to get anything out of their house:
MAR 13:16 nor must one who is on their farm turn back to get their cloak.
MAR 13:17 And alas for pregnant women, and for those who are nursing infants in those days!
MAR 13:18 Pray, too, that this may not occur in winter.
MAR 13:19 For those days will be a time of distress, the like of which has not occurred from the beginning of God’s creation until now – and never will again.
MAR 13:20 And, had not the Lord put a limit to those days, not a single soul would escape; but, for the sake of God’s own chosen people, he did limit them.
MAR 13:21 ‘And at that time if anyone should say to you “Look, here is the Christ!” “Look, there he is!”, do not believe it;
MAR 13:22 for false Christs and false prophets will arise, and display signs and marvels, to lead astray, were it possible, even God’s people.
MAR 13:23 But see that you are on your guard! I have told you all this beforehand.
MAR 13:24 ‘In those days, after that time of distress, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give her light,
MAR 13:25 the stars will be falling from the heavens, and the forces that are in the heavens will be convulsed.
MAR 13:26 Then will be seen the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory;
MAR 13:27 and then he will send the angels, and gather his people from the four winds, from one end of the world to the other.
MAR 13:28 ‘Learn the lesson taught by the fig tree. As soon as its branches are full of sap, and it is bursting into leaf, you know that summer is near.
MAR 13:29 And so may you, as soon as you see these things happening, know that he is at your doors.
MAR 13:30 I tell you that even the present generation will not pass away, until all these things have taken place.
MAR 13:31 The heavens and the earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
MAR 13:32 ‘But about that day, or the hour, no one knows – not even the angels in heaven, not even the Son – but only the Father.
MAR 13:33 ‘See that you are on the watch; for you do not know when the time will be.
MAR 13:34 It is like a man going on a journey, who leaves his home, puts his servants in charge – each having their special duty – and orders the porter to watch.
MAR 13:35 Therefore watch, for you cannot be sure when the Master of the house is coming – whether in the evening, at midnight, at daybreak, or in the morning –
MAR 13:36 otherwise he might come suddenly and find you asleep.
MAR 13:37 And what I say to you I say to all – Watch!’
MAR 14:1 It was now two days before the Festival of the Passover and the unleavened bread. The chief priests and the teachers of the Law were looking for an opportunity to arrest Jesus by stealth, and to put him to death;
MAR 14:2 for they said, ‘Not during the Festival, or the people may riot.’
MAR 14:3 When Jesus was still at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, while he was sitting at the table, a woman came with an alabaster jar of choice spikenard perfume of great value. She broke the jar, and poured the perfume on his head.
MAR 14:4 Some of those who were present said to one another indignantly, ‘Why has the perfume been wasted like this?
MAR 14:5 This perfume could have been sold for more than a year’s wages, and the money given to the poor.’
MAR 14:6 ‘Leave her alone,’ said Jesus, as they began to find fault with her, ‘why are you troubling her? This is a beautiful deed that she has done for me.
MAR 14:7 You always have the poor with you, and whenever you wish you can do good to them; but you will not always have me.
MAR 14:8 She has done what she could; she has perfumed my body beforehand for my burial.
MAR 14:9 And I tell you, wherever, in the whole world, the good news is proclaimed, what this woman has done will be told in memory of her.’
MAR 14:10 After this, Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, went to the chief priests, to betray Jesus to them.
MAR 14:11 They were glad to hear what he said, and promised to pay him. So he began looking for a good opportunity to betray Jesus.
MAR 14:12 On the first day of the Festival of the unleavened bread, when it was customary to kill the Passover lambs, his disciples said to Jesus, ‘Where do you wish us to go and make preparations for your eating the Passover?’
MAR 14:13 Jesus sent forward two of his disciples and said to them, ‘Go into the city, and there a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you; follow him;
MAR 14:14 and, wherever he goes in, say to the owner of the house “The teacher says – Where is my room where I am to eat the Passover with my disciples?”
MAR 14:15 He will himself show you a large upstairs room, set out ready; and there make preparations for us.’
MAR 14:16 So the disciples set out and went into the city, and found everything just as Jesus had told them; and they prepared the Passover.
MAR 14:17 In the evening he went there with the Twelve,
MAR 14:18 and when they had taken their places and were eating, Jesus said, ‘I tell you that one of you is going to betray me – one who is eating with me.’
MAR 14:19 They were grieved at this, and began to say to him, one after another, ‘Can it be I?’
MAR 14:20 ‘It is one of you Twelve,’ said Jesus, ‘the one who is dipping his bread beside me into the dish.
MAR 14:21 True, the Son of Man must go, as scripture says of him, yet alas for that man by whom the Son of Man is being betrayed! For that man it would be better never to have been born!’
MAR 14:22 While they were eating, Jesus took some bread, and, after saying the blessing, broke it, and gave it to them, and said, ‘Take it; this is my body.’
MAR 14:23 Then he took a cup, and, after saying the thanksgiving, gave it to them, and they all drank from it.
MAR 14:24 ‘This is my covenant-blood,’ he said, ‘which is poured out on behalf of many.
MAR 14:25 I tell you that I will never again drink of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I will drink it new in the kingdom of God.’
MAR 14:26 They then sang a hymn, and went out up the Mount of Olives,
MAR 14:27 presently Jesus said to them, ‘All of you will fall away; for scripture says – “I will strike down the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.”
MAR 14:28 Yet, after I have risen, I will go before you into Galilee.’
MAR 14:29 ‘Even if everyone else falls away,’ said Peter, ‘I will not.’
MAR 14:30 ‘I tell you,’ answered Jesus, ‘that you yourself today – yes, this very night – before the cock crows twice, will disown me three times.’
MAR 14:31 But Peter vehemently protested, ‘Even if I must die with you, I will never disown you!’ And they all said the same.
MAR 14:32 Presently they came to a garden known as Gethsemane, and Jesus said to his disciples ‘Sit down here while I pray.’
MAR 14:33 He took with him Peter, James, and John; and began to show signs of great dismay and deep distress of mind.
MAR 14:34 ‘I am sad at heart,’ he said, ‘sad even to death; wait here, and watch.’
MAR 14:35 Going on a little further, he threw himself on the ground, and began to pray that, if it were possible, he might be spared that hour.
MAR 14:36 ‘Abba, Father,’ he said, ‘all things are possible to you; take away this cup from me; yet, not what I will, but what you will.’
MAR 14:37 Then he came and found the three apostles asleep. ‘Simon,’ he said to Peter, ‘are you asleep? Couldn’t you watch for one hour?
MAR 14:38 Watch and pray,’ he said to them all, ‘so that you may not fall into temptation. True, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.’
MAR 14:39 Again he went away, and prayed in the same words;
MAR 14:40 and coming back again he found them asleep, for their eyes were heavy; and they did not know what to say to him.
MAR 14:41 A third time he came, and said to them, ‘Sleep on now, and rest yourselves. Enough! My time has come. Look, the Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of wicked people.
MAR 14:42 Up, and let us be going. Look! My betrayer is close at hand.’
MAR 14:43 And just then, while he was still speaking, Judas, who was one of the Twelve, came up; and with him a crowd of people, with swords and clubs, sent by the chief priests, the teachers of the Law, and the elders.
MAR 14:44 Now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them. ‘The man whom I kiss,’ he had said, ‘will be the one; arrest him and take him away safely.’
MAR 14:45 As soon as Judas came, he went up to Jesus at once, and said, ‘Rabbi!’ and kissed him.
MAR 14:46 Then the men seized Jesus, and arrested him.
MAR 14:47 One of those who were standing by drew his sword, and struck at the high priest’s servant, and cut off his ear.
MAR 14:48 But Jesus spoke up, and said to the men, ‘Have you come out, as if after a robber, with swords and clubs, to take me?
MAR 14:49 I have been among you day after day in the Temple Courts teaching, and yet you did not arrest me; but this is in fulfilment of the scriptures.’
MAR 14:50 And all the apostles deserted him and fled.
MAR 14:51 One young man did indeed follow him, wrapped only in a linen sheet. They tried to arrest him;
MAR 14:52 but he left the sheet in their hands, and fled naked.
MAR 14:53 Then they took Jesus to the high priest; and all the chief priests, elders, and the teachers of the Law assembled.
MAR 14:54 Peter, who had followed Jesus at a distance into the courtyard of the high priest, was sitting there among the guards, warming himself at the blaze of the fire.
MAR 14:55 Meanwhile the chief priest and the whole of the High Council were trying to get such evidence against Jesus as would warrant his being put to death, but they could not find any;
MAR 14:56 for, though there were many who gave false evidence against him, yet their evidence did not agree.
MAR 14:57 Presently some men stood up, and gave this false evidence against him –
MAR 14:58 ‘We ourselves heard him say “I will destroy this Temple made with hands, and in three days build another made without hands.”’
MAR 14:59 Yet not even on that point did their evidence agree.
MAR 14:60 Then the high priest stood forward, and questioned Jesus. ‘Have you no answer to make?’ he asked. ‘What is this evidence which these men are giving against you?’
MAR 14:61 But Jesus remained silent, and made no answer. A second time the high priest questioned him. ‘Are you,’ he asked, ‘the Christ, the Son of the Blessed One?’
MAR 14:62 ‘I am,’ replied Jesus, ‘and you will all see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the Almighty, and coming in the clouds of heaven.’
MAR 14:63 At this the high priest tore his vestments. ‘Why do we want any more witnesses?’ he exclaimed.
MAR 14:64 ‘You heard his blasphemy? What is your verdict?’ They all condemned him, declaring that he deserved death.
MAR 14:65 Some of those present began to spit at him, and to blindfold his eyes, and strike him, saying, as they did so, ‘Now play the prophet!’ and even the guards received him with blows.
MAR 14:66 While Peter was in the courtyard down below, one of the high priest’s maidservants came up;
MAR 14:67 and, seeing Peter warming himself, she looked closely at him, and exclaimed, ‘Why, you were with Jesus, the Nazarene!’
MAR 14:68 But Peter denied it. ‘I do not know or understand what you mean,’ he replied. Then he went out into the porch;
MAR 14:69 and there the maidservant, on seeing him, began to say again to the bystanders, ‘This is one of them!’
MAR 14:70 But Peter again denied it. Soon afterwards the bystanders again said to him, ‘You certainly are one of them; why you are a Galilean!’
MAR 14:71 But he said to them, ‘I swear that I do not know the man you are talking about! May God punish me if I am lying!’
MAR 14:72 At that moment, for the second time, a cock crowed; and Peter remembered the words that Jesus had said to him – “Before a cock has crowed twice, you will disown me three times”; and, as he thought of it, he began to weep.
MAR 15:1 As soon as it was daylight, the chief priests, after holding a consultation with elders and teachers of the Law – that is to say, the whole High Council – put Jesus in chains, and took him away, and gave him up to Pilate.
MAR 15:2 ‘Are you the king of the Jews?’ asked Pilate. ‘It is true,’ replied Jesus.
MAR 15:3 Then the chief priests brought a number of charges against him.
MAR 15:4 So Pilate questioned Jesus again. ‘Have you no reply to make?’ he asked. ‘Listen, how many charges they are bringing against you.’
MAR 15:5 But Jesus still made no reply whatever; at which Pilate was astonished.
MAR 15:6 Now, at the feast, Pilate used to grant the people the release of any one prisoner whom they might ask for.
MAR 15:7 A man called Barabbas was in prison, with the rioters who had committed murder during a riot.
MAR 15:8 So, when the crowd went up and began to ask Pilate to follow his usual custom,
MAR 15:9 he answered, ‘Do you want me to release the “king of the Jews” for you?’
MAR 15:10 For he was aware that it was out of jealousy that the chief priests had given Jesus up to him.
MAR 15:11 But the chief priests incited the crowd to get Barabbas released instead.
MAR 15:12 Pilate, however, spoke to them again, ‘What should I do then with the man whom you call the “king of the Jews”?’
MAR 15:13 Again they shouted, ‘Crucify him!’
MAR 15:14 ‘Why, what harm has he done?’ Pilate kept saying to them. But they shouted furiously, ‘Crucify him!’
MAR 15:15 And Pilate, wishing to satisfy the crowd, released Barabbas to them, and, after scourging Jesus, gave him up to be crucified.
MAR 15:16 The soldiers then took Jesus away into the courtyard – that is the Government house – and they called the whole garrison together.
MAR 15:17 They dressed him in a purple robe, and, having twisted a crown of thorns, put it on him,
MAR 15:18 and then began to salute him. ‘Long life to you, king of the Jews!’ they said.
MAR 15:19 And they kept striking him on the head with a rod, spitting at him, and bowing to the ground before him – going down on their knees;
MAR 15:20 and, when they had left off mocking him, they took off the purple robe, and put his own clothes on him.
MAR 15:21 They led Jesus out to crucify him; and they compelled a passer-by, Simon from Cyrene, who was on his way in from the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to go with them to carry his cross.
MAR 15:22 They brought Jesus to the place which was known as Golgotha – a name which means “place of a Skull.”
MAR 15:23 There they offered him drugged wine; but Jesus refused it.
MAR 15:24 Then they crucified him, and divided his clothes among them, casting lots for them, to settle what each should take.
MAR 15:25 It was nine in the morning when they crucified him.
MAR 15:26 The words of the charge against him, written up over his head, read – “THE KING OF THE JEWS.”
MAR 15:27 And with him they crucified two robbers, one on the right, and the other on the left.
MAR 15:28 
MAR 15:29 The passers-by railed at him, shaking their heads, as they said, ‘Ah! You who would destroy the Temple and build one in three days,
MAR 15:30 come down from the cross and save yourself!’
MAR 15:31 In the same way the chief priests, with the teachers of the Law, said to one another in mockery,
MAR 15:32 ‘He saved others, but he cannot save himself! Let the Christ, the “king of Israel,” come down from the cross now so that we can see it and believe.’ Even the men who had been crucified with Jesus insulted him.
MAR 15:33 At midday, a darkness came over the whole country, lasting until three in the afternoon.
MAR 15:34 And, at three, Jesus called out loudly, ‘Eloi, Eloi, lama sabacthani?’ which means “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”
MAR 15:35 Some of those standing round heard this, and said, ‘Listen! He is calling for Elijah!’
MAR 15:36 And a man ran, and, soaking a sponge in common wine, put it on the end of a rod, and offered it to him to drink, saying as he did so, ‘Wait and let us see if Elijah is coming to take him down.’
MAR 15:37 But Jesus, giving a loud cry, breathed his last.
MAR 15:38 The Temple curtain was torn in two from top to bottom.
MAR 15:39 The Roman officer, who was standing facing Jesus, on seeing the way in which he breathed his last, exclaimed, ‘This man must indeed have been God’s son!’
MAR 15:40 There were some women also watching from a distance, among them being Mary of Magdala, Mary the mother of James the Little and of Joseph, and Salome –
MAR 15:41 all of whom used to accompany Jesus when he was in Galilee, and give him support – besides many other women who had come up with him to Jerusalem.
MAR 15:42 The evening had already fallen, when, as it was the Preparation day – the day before the Sabbath –
MAR 15:43 Joseph from Arimathea, a councillor of good position, who was himself living in expectation of the kingdom of God, came and ventured to go in to see Pilate, and to ask for the body of Jesus.
MAR 15:44 But Pilate was surprised to hear that he had already died. So he sent for the officer, and asked if he were already dead;
MAR 15:45 and, on learning from the officer that it was so, he gave the corpse to Joseph.
MAR 15:46 Joseph, having bought a linen sheet, took Jesus down, and wound the sheet round him, and laid him in a tomb which had been cut out of the rock; and then rolled a stone up against the entrance of the tomb.
MAR 15:47 Mary of Magdala and Mary, the mother of Joseph, were watching to see where he was laid.
MAR 16:1 When the Sabbath was over, Mary of Magdala, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought some spices, so that they might go and anoint the body of Jesus.
MAR 16:2 Very early on the first day of the week they went to the tomb, after sunrise.
MAR 16:3 They were saying to one another, ‘Who will roll away the stone for us from the entrance of the tomb?’
MAR 16:4 But, on looking up, they saw that the stone had already been rolled back; it was a very large one.
MAR 16:5 Going into the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on their right, in a white robe, and they were dismayed; but he said to them,
MAR 16:6 ‘Do not be dismayed; you are looking for Jesus, the Nazarene, who has been crucified; he has risen, he is not here! Look! Here is the place where they laid him.
MAR 16:7 But go, and say to his disciples and to Peter “He is going before you into Galilee; there you will see him, as he told you.”’
MAR 16:8 They went out, and fled from the tomb, for they were trembling and bewildered; and they did not say a word to anyone, for they were frightened.
MAR 16:9 After his rising again, early on the first day of the week, Jesus appeared first of all to Mary of Magdala, from whom he had driven out seven demons.
MAR 16:10 She went and told the news to those who had been with him and who were now in sorrow and tears;
MAR 16:11 yet even they, when they heard that he was alive and had been seen by her, did not believe it.
MAR 16:12 Afterwards, altered in appearance, he made himself known to two of them, as they were walking, on their way into the country.
MAR 16:13 They also went and told the rest, but they did not believe even them.
MAR 16:14 Later on, he made himself known to the Eleven themselves as they were at a meal, and reproached them with their want of faith and their stubbornness, because they did not believe those who had seen him after he had risen from the dead.
MAR 16:15 Then he said to them, ‘Go into all the world, and proclaim the good news to all creation.
MAR 16:16 He who believes and is baptised will be saved; but he who refuses to believe will be condemned.
MAR 16:17 Moreover these signs will attend those who believe. In my name they will drive out demons; they will speak in new languages;
MAR 16:18 they will take up snakes in their hands; and, if they drink any poison, it will not hurt them; they will place their hands on sick people and they will recover.’
MAR 16:19 So the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken to them, was taken up into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God.
MAR 16:20 But they set out, and made the proclamation everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the message by the signs which attended it. But all that had been revealed to them they reported briefly to Peter and his companions. Afterwards Jesus himself sent out through them, from east to west, the sacred and imperishable proclamation of eternal salvation.
LUK 1:1 To his Excellency, Theophilus. Many attempts have been already made to draw up an account of those events which have reached their conclusion among us,
LUK 1:2 just as they were reported to us by those who from the beginning were eye-witnesses, and afterwards became bearers of the message.
LUK 1:3 And, therefore, I also, since I have investigated all these events with great care from their very beginning, have resolved to write a connected history of them for you,
LUK 1:4 in order that you may be able to satisfy yourself of the accuracy of the story which you have heard from the lips of others.
LUK 1:5 In the reign of Herod, king of Judea, there was a priest named Zechariah, who belonged to the division called after Abijah. His wife, whose name was Elizabeth, was also a descendant of Aaron.
LUK 1:6 They were both righteous people, who lived blameless lives, guiding their steps by all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord.
LUK 1:7 But they had no child, Elizabeth being barren; and both of them were advanced in years.
LUK 1:8 One day, when Zechariah was officiating as priest before God, during the turn of his division,
LUK 1:9 it fell to him by lot, in accordance with the practice among the priests, to go into the Temple of the Lord and burn incense;
LUK 1:10 and, as it was the Hour of Incense, the people were all praying outside.
LUK 1:11 And an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing on the right of the Altar of Incense.
LUK 1:12 Zechariah was startled at the sight and was awe-struck.
LUK 1:13 But the angel said to him, ‘Do not be afraid, Zechariah; your prayer has been heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, whom you will call by the name John.
LUK 1:14 He will be to you a joy and a delight; and many will rejoice over his birth.
LUK 1:15 For he will be great in the sight of the Lord; he will not drink any wine or strong drink, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit from the very hour of his birth,
LUK 1:16 and will reconcile many of the Israelites to the Lord their God.
LUK 1:17 He will go before him in the spirit and with the power of Elijah, to reconcile fathers to their children and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous, and so make ready for the Lord a people prepared for him.’
LUK 1:18 ‘How can I be sure of this?’ Zechariah asked the angel. ‘For I am an old man and my wife is advanced in years.’
LUK 1:19 ‘I am Gabriel,’ the angel answered, ‘who stands in the presence of God, and I have been sent to speak to you and to bring you this good news.
LUK 1:20 And now you will be silent and unable to speak until the day when this takes place, because you did not believe what I said, though my words will be fulfilled in due course.’
LUK 1:21 Meanwhile the people were watching for Zechariah, wondering at his remaining so long in the Temple.
LUK 1:22 When he came out, he was unable to speak to them, and they perceived that he had seen a vision there. But Zechariah kept making signs to them, and remained dumb.
LUK 1:23 And, as soon as his term of service was finished, he returned home.
LUK 1:24 After this his wife, Elizabeth, became pregnant and lived in seclusion for five months.
LUK 1:25 ‘The Lord has done this for me,’ she said, ‘he has shown me kindness and taken away the public disgrace of childlessness under which I have been living.’
LUK 1:26 Six months later the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a town in Galilee called Nazareth,
LUK 1:27 to a maiden there who was engaged to a man named Joseph, a descendant of David. Her name was Mary.
LUK 1:28 Gabriel came into her presence and greeted her, saying, ‘You have been shown great favour – the Lord is with you.’
LUK 1:29 Mary was much disturbed at his words, and was wondering to herself what such a greeting could mean,
LUK 1:30 when the angel spoke again, ‘Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favour with God.
LUK 1:31 And now, you will conceive and give birth to a son, and you will give him the name Jesus.
LUK 1:32 The child will be great and will be called “Son of the Most High,” and the Lord God will give him the throne of his ancestor David,
LUK 1:33 and he will reign over the descendants of Jacob for ever; And to his kingdom there will be no end.’
LUK 1:34 ‘How can this be?’ Mary asked the angel. ‘For I have no husband.’
LUK 1:35 ‘The Holy Spirit will descend on you,’ answered the angel, ‘and the Power of the Most High will overshadow you; and therefore the child will be called “holy,” and “Son of God.”
LUK 1:36 And Elizabeth, your cousin, is herself also expecting a son in her old age; and it is now the sixth month with her, though she is called barren;
LUK 1:37 for no promise from God will fail to be fulfilled.’
LUK 1:38 ‘I am the servant of the Lord,’ exclaimed Mary. ‘Let it be with me as you have said.’ Then the angel left her.
LUK 1:39 Soon after this Mary set out, and made her way quickly into the hill-country, to a town in Judah;
LUK 1:40 and there she went into Zechariah’s house and greeted Elizabeth.
LUK 1:41 When Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting, the child moved within her, and Elizabeth herself was filled with the Holy Spirit,
LUK 1:42 and cried aloud, ‘Blessed are you among women, and blessed is your unborn child!
LUK 1:43 But how have I this honour, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
LUK 1:44 For, as soon as your greeting reached my ears, the child moved within me with delight!
LUK 1:45 Happy indeed is she who believed that the promise which she received from the Lord would be fulfilled.’
LUK 1:46 And Mary said: ‘My soul exalts the Lord,
LUK 1:47 and my spirit delights in God my Saviour,
LUK 1:48 for he has looked with favour on his humble servant girl. From now on all generations will call me blessed!
LUK 1:49 ‘For the Almighty has done great things for me, and holy is his name.
LUK 1:50 He has mercy on those who revere him in every generation.
LUK 1:51 ‘Mighty are the deeds of his arm! He has scattered the self-satisfied proud,
LUK 1:52 he has cast down the mighty from their thrones, and he uplifts the humble,
LUK 1:53 he has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent away empty.
LUK 1:54 ‘He has stretched out his hand to his servant Israel, ever mindful of his mercy,
LUK 1:55 as he promised to our ancestors, to Abraham and his descendants for ever.’
LUK 1:56 Mary stayed with Elizabeth about three months, and then returned to her home.
LUK 1:57 When Elizabeth’s time came, she gave birth to a son;
LUK 1:58 and her neighbours and relatives, hearing of the great goodness of the Lord to her, came to share her joy.
LUK 1:59 A week later they met to circumcise the child, and were about to call him Zechariah after his father,
LUK 1:60 when his mother spoke up, ‘No, he is to be called John.’
LUK 1:61 ‘You have no relation of that name!’ they exclaimed;
LUK 1:62 and they made signs to the child’s father, to find out what he wished the child to be called.
LUK 1:63 Asking for a writing tablet, he wrote the words – “His name is John.” Everyone was surprised
LUK 1:64 and immediately Zechariah recovered his voice and the use of his tongue, and began to bless God.
LUK 1:65 All their neighbours were awe-struck at this, and throughout the hill-country of Judea the whole story was much talked about.
LUK 1:66 All who heard it kept it in mind, asking one another – ‘What can this child be destined to become?’ For the Power of the Lord was with him.
LUK 1:67 Then his father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit, and, speaking under inspiration, said:
LUK 1:68 ‘Blessed is the Lord, the God of Israel, who has visited his people and wrought their deliverance,
LUK 1:69 and has raised up for us the strength of our salvation in the house of his servant David –
LUK 1:70 as he promised by the lips of his holy prophets of old –
LUK 1:71 salvation from our enemies and from the hands of all who hate us,
LUK 1:72 showing mercy to our ancestors, and mindful of his sacred covenant.
LUK 1:73 This was the oath which he swore to our ancestor Abraham –
LUK 1:74 that we should be rescued from the hands of our enemies,
LUK 1:75 and should serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness, in his presence all our days.
LUK 1:76 And you, child, will be called prophet of the Most High, for you will go before the Lord to make ready his way,
LUK 1:77 to give his people the knowledge of salvation through the forgiveness of their sins,
LUK 1:78 through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the dawn will break on us from heaven,
LUK 1:79 to give light to those who live in darkness and the shadow of death, and guide our feet into the way of peace.’
LUK 1:80 The child grew and became strong in spirit, and he lived in the wilds until the time came for his appearance before Israel.
LUK 2:1 About that time an edict was issued by the Emperor Augustus that a census should be taken of the whole Empire.
LUK 2:2 (This was the first census taken while Quirinius was Governor of Syria).
LUK 2:3 And everyone went to his own town to be registered.
LUK 2:4 Among others Joseph went up from the town of Nazareth in Galilee to Bethlehem, the town of David, in Judea – because he belonged to the family and house of David –
LUK 2:5 to be registered with Mary, his engaged wife, who was about to become a mother.
LUK 2:6 While they were there her time came,
LUK 2:7 and she gave birth to her first child, a son. And because there was no room for them in the inn, she swathed him round and laid him in a manger.
LUK 2:8 In that same countryside were shepherds out in the open fields, watching their flocks that night,
LUK 2:9 when an angel of the Lord suddenly stood by them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them; and they were seized with fear.
LUK 2:10 ‘Have no fear,’ the angel said. ‘For I bring you good news of a great joy in store for all the nation.
LUK 2:11 This day there has been born to you, in the town of David, a Saviour, who is Christ and Lord.
LUK 2:12 And this will be the sign for you. You will find the infant swathed, and lying in a manger.’
LUK 2:13 Then suddenly there appeared with the angel a multitude of the heavenly Host, praising God, and singing –
LUK 2:14 ‘glory to God on high, and on earth peace among those in whom he finds pleasure.’
LUK 2:15 Now, when the angels had left them and gone back to heaven, the shepherds said to one another, ‘Let us go at once to Bethlehem, and see this thing that has happened, of which the Lord has told us.’
LUK 2:16 So they went quickly, and found Mary and Joseph, and the infant lying in a manger;
LUK 2:17 and, when they saw it, they told of all that had been said to them about this child.
LUK 2:18 All who heard the shepherds were astonished at their story,
LUK 2:19 while Mary treasured in her heart all that they said, and thought about it often.
LUK 2:20 And the shepherds went back, giving glory and praise to God for all that they had heard and seen. It had all happened as they had been told.
LUK 2:21 Eight days after the birth of the child, when it was time to circumcise him, he received the name Jesus – the name given him by the angel before his conception.
LUK 2:22 When the period of purification of mother and child, required by the Law of Moses, came to an end, his parents took the child up to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord,
LUK 2:23 in compliance with the Law of the Lord that every firstborn male will be dedicated to the Lord,
LUK 2:24 and also to offer the sacrifice required by the Law of the Lord – a pair of turtle-doves or two young pigeons.
LUK 2:25 There was at that time in Jerusalem a man named Simeon, a righteous and devout man, who lived in constant expectation of Israel’s consulation, and under the guidance of the Holy Spirit.
LUK 2:26 It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he should not die until he had seen the Lord’s Christ.
LUK 2:27 Moved by the Spirit, Simeon came into the Temple Courts, and, when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him what was customary under the Law,
LUK 2:28 Simeon himself took the child in his arms, and blessed God, and said:
LUK 2:29 ‘Now, Lord, you will let your servant go, according to your word, in peace,
LUK 2:30 for my eyes have seen the salvation
LUK 2:31 which you have prepared in the sight of all nations –
LUK 2:32 a light to bring light to the Gentiles, and to be the glory of your people Israel.’
LUK 2:33 While the child’s father and mother were wondering at what was said about him,
LUK 2:34 Simeon gave them his blessing, and said to Mary, the child’s mother, ‘This child is appointed to be the cause of the fall and rise of many in Israel, and to be a sign much spoken against –
LUK 2:35 Yes, the sword will pierce your own heart – and so the thoughts in many minds will be disclosed.’
LUK 2:36 There was also a prophet named Hannah, a daughter of Phanuel and of the tribe of Asher. She was far advanced in years, having lived with her husband for seven years after marriage,
LUK 2:37 and then a widow, until she had reached the age of eighty-four. She never left the Temple Courts, but, fasting and praying, worshiped God night and day.
LUK 2:38 At that moment she came up, and began publicly to thank God and to speak about the child to all who were looking for the deliverance of Jerusalem.
LUK 2:39 When the child’s parents had done everything required by the Law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee to their own town of Nazareth.
LUK 2:40 The child grew and became strong and wise, and the blessing of God was on him.
LUK 2:41 Every year the child’s parents used to go to Jerusalem at the Passover Festival.
LUK 2:42 When Jesus was twelve years old, they went according to custom to Jerusalem,
LUK 2:43 and had finished their visit; but, when they started to return, the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem, without their knowing it.
LUK 2:44 Thinking that he was with their fellow travellers, they went one day’s journey before searching for him among their relatives and acquaintances;
LUK 2:45 and then, as they did not find him, they returned to Jerusalem, searching everywhere for him.
LUK 2:46 It was not until the third day that they found him in the Temple Courts, sitting among the teachers, now listening to them, now asking them questions.
LUK 2:47 All who listened to him marvelled at his intelligence and his answers.
LUK 2:48 His parents were amazed when they saw him, and his mother said to him, ‘My child, why have you treated us like this? Your father and I have been searching for you in great distress.’
LUK 2:49 ‘What made you search for me?’ he answered. ‘Didn’t you know that I must be in my Father’s house?’
LUK 2:50 His parents did not understand what he meant.
LUK 2:51 However he went down with them to Nazareth, and submitted himself to their control; and his mother treasured all that was said in her heart.
LUK 2:52 And Jesus grew in wisdom as he grew in years, and gained the blessing of God and people.
LUK 3:1 In the fifteenth year of the reign of the Emperor Tiberius, when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, Herod ruler of Galilee, his brother Philip ruler of the territory comprising Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias ruler of Abilene,
LUK 3:2 and when Annas and Caiaphas were high priests, a command from God came to John, the son of Zechariah, while he was in the wilderness.
LUK 3:3 And John went through the whole district of the Jordan, proclaiming a baptism of repentance, for the forgiveness of sins.
LUK 3:4 This was in fulfilment of what is said in the writings of the prophet Isaiah – “The voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness: ‘Make ready the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.
LUK 3:5 Every chasm will be filled, every mountain and hill will be levelled. The winding ways will be straightened, the rough roads made smooth,
LUK 3:6 and everyone will see the salvation of God.’”
LUK 3:7 And John said to the crowds that went to be baptised by him, ‘You children of snakes! Who has prompted you to seek refuge from the coming judgment?
LUK 3:8 Let your lives, then, prove your repentance; and do not begin to say among yourselves “Abraham is our ancestor,” for I tell you that out of these stones God is able to raise descendants for Abraham!
LUK 3:9 Already, indeed, the axe is lying at the root of the trees. Therefore every tree that fails to bear good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.’
LUK 3:10 ‘What are we to do then?’ the people asked.
LUK 3:11 ‘Let anyone who has two coats,’ answered John, ‘share with the person who has none; and anyone who has food do the same.’
LUK 3:12 Even tax collectors came to be baptised, and said to John, ‘Teacher, what are we to do?’
LUK 3:13 ‘Do not collect more than you have authority to demand,’ John answered.
LUK 3:14 And when some soldiers on active service asked ‘And we – what are we to do?’ he said, ‘Never use violence, or exact anything by false accusation; and be content with your pay.’
LUK 3:15 Then, while the people were in suspense, and were all debating with themselves whether John could be the Christ,
LUK 3:16 John, addressing them all, said, ‘I, indeed, baptise you with water; but there is coming one more powerful than I, and I am not fit even to unfasten his sandals. He will baptise you with the Holy Spirit and with fire.
LUK 3:17 His winnowing-fan is in his hand so that he may clear his threshing-floor, and store the grain in his barn, but the chaff he will burn with a fire that cannot be put out.’
LUK 3:18 And so with many different appeals John told his good news to the people.
LUK 3:19 But when John rebuked Herod the ruler, for Herodia his brother’s wife, and for all the evil things that he had done,
LUK 3:20 Herod crowned them all by shutting John up in prison.
LUK 3:21 Now after the baptism of all the people, and when Jesus had been baptised and was still praying, the heavens opened,
LUK 3:22 and the Holy Spirit came down on him in the form of a dove, and from the heavens came a voice – ‘You are my dearly loved son; you bring me great joy.’
LUK 3:23 When beginning his work, Jesus was about thirty years old. He was regarded as the son of Joseph, whose ancestors were – Eli,
LUK 3:24 Mattith, Levi, Melchiah, Janna, Joseph,
LUK 3:25 Mattithiah, Amos, Nahum, Azaliah, Nogah,
LUK 3:26 Mattith, Mattithiah, Shimei, Joseph, Josheh,
LUK 3:27 Johanan, Rhesa, Zerubbabel, Salathiel, Neriah,
LUK 3:28 Melchiah, Addi, Cosam, Elmodam, Er,
LUK 3:29 Joshua, Eliezer, Joram, Mattith, Levi,
LUK 3:30 Simeon, Judah, Joseph, Jonam, Eliakim,
LUK 3:31 Meleah, Menan, Mattithiah, Nathan, David,
LUK 3:32 Jesse, Obed, Boaz, Salah, Nahshon,
LUK 3:33 Aminadab, Arni, Hezron, Perez, Judah,
LUK 3:34 Jacob, Isaac, Abraham, Terah, Nahor,
LUK 3:35 Serug, Reu, Peleg, Eber, Shelah,
LUK 3:36 Kenan, Arpachshad, Shem, Noah, Lamech,
LUK 3:37 Methuselah, Enoch, Jared, Mahalalel, Kenan,
LUK 3:38 Enosh, Seth, son of Adam, and Adam, son of God.
LUK 4:1 On returning from the Jordan, full of the Holy Spirit, Jesus was led by the power of the Spirit through the wilderness for forty days, tempted by the devil.
LUK 4:2 All that time he ate nothing; and, when it was over, he became hungry.
LUK 4:3 So the devil said to him, ‘If you are God’s Son, tell this stone to become a loaf of bread.’
LUK 4:4 And Jesus answered him, ‘Scripture says – “It is not on bread alone that a person is to live.”’
LUK 4:5 And the devil led Jesus up, and showing him in a single moment all the kingdoms of the earth, said to him,
LUK 4:6 ‘I will give you all this power, and the splendour of them; for it has been given into my hands and I give it to whom I wish.
LUK 4:7 If you worship me, it will all be yours.’
LUK 4:8 And Jesus answered him, ‘Scripture says – “You should worship the Lord your God, and worship him only.”’
LUK 4:9 The devil next led him into Jerusalem, and, placing him on the parapet of the Temple, said, ‘If you are God’s Son throw yourself down from here,
LUK 4:10 for scripture says – “He will give his angels commands about you, to guard you safely,”
LUK 4:11 And “On their hands they will lift you up, otherwise you might strike your foot against a stone.”’
LUK 4:12 But Jesus answered him, ‘It is said – “You must not tempt the Lord your God.”’
LUK 4:13 When he had tried every kind of temptation, the devil left Jesus, until another opportunity.
LUK 4:14 Moved by the power of the Spirit, Jesus returned to Galilee. Reports about him spread through all that region;
LUK 4:15 and he began to teach in their synagogues, and was honoured by everyone.
LUK 4:16 Coming to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, Jesus, as was his custom, went on the Sabbath into the synagogue, and stood up to read the scriptures.
LUK 4:17 He was given the book of the prophet Isaiah; and Jesus opened the book and found the place where it says –
LUK 4:18 “The Spirit of the Lord is on me, for he has consecrated me to bring good news to the poor, he has sent me to proclaim release to captives and restoration of sight to the blind, to set the oppressed at liberty,
LUK 4:19 to proclaim the year of the Lord’s favour.”
LUK 4:20 Then, closing the book and returning it to the attendant, he sat down. The eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed on him,
LUK 4:21 and Jesus began, ‘This very day this passage has been fulfilled in your hearing.’
LUK 4:22 All who were present spoke well of him, and were astonished at the beautiful words that fell from his lips. ‘Isn’t this Joseph’s son?’ they asked.
LUK 4:23 ‘Doubtless,’ said Jesus, ‘you will remind me of the saying – “Doctor, cure yourself;” and you will say “Do here in your own country all that we have heard that has been done at Capernaum.”
LUK 4:24 I tell you,’ he continued, ‘that no prophet is acceptable in his own country.
LUK 4:25 There were, doubtless, many widows in Israel in Elijah’s days, when the heavens were closed for three years and six months, and a severe famine prevailed throughout the country;
LUK 4:26 and yet it was not to one of them that Elijah was sent, but to a widow at Zarephath in Sidonia.
LUK 4:27 And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of the prophet Elisha, yet it was not one of them who was made clean, but Naaman the Syrian.’
LUK 4:28 All the people in the synagogue, as they listened to this, became enraged.
LUK 4:29 Starting up, they drove Jesus out of the town, and led him to the brow of the hill on which their town stood, intending to hurl him down.
LUK 4:30 But he passed through the middle of the crowd and went on his way.
LUK 4:31 Then Jesus went down to Capernaum, a city in Galilee. On the Sabbath he taught the people.
LUK 4:32 They were amazed at his teaching, because his words were spoken with authority.
LUK 4:33 In the synagogue there was a man with the spirit of a foul demon in him, who called out loudly,
LUK 4:34 ‘Stop! What do you want with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are – the Holy One of God!’
LUK 4:35 But Jesus rebuked the demon. ‘Be silent! Come out from him,’ he said. The demon flung the man down in the middle of the people, and then came out from him, without causing him further harm.
LUK 4:36 And they were all lost in amazement, and kept saying to one another, ‘What words are these? For he gives his commands to the foul spirits with a marvellous authority, and they come out.’
LUK 4:37 And rumours about Jesus traveled through every place in the region.
LUK 4:38 On leaving the synagogue, Jesus went into Simon’s house. Now Simon’s mother-in-law was suffering from a severe attack of fever, and they asked Jesus to cure her.
LUK 4:39 Bending over her, he rebuked the fever; the fever left her, and she immediately got up and began to take care of them.
LUK 4:40 At sunset, all who had friends suffering from various diseases took them to Jesus; and he placed his hands on everyone of them and cured them.
LUK 4:41 And even demons came out from many people, screaming “You are the Son of God.” Jesus rebuked them, and would not allow them to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ.
LUK 4:42 At daybreak, Jesus went out and walked to a lonely spot. But crowds of people began to look for him; and they came to where he was and tried to detain him and prevent his leaving them.
LUK 4:43 Jesus, however, said to them, ‘I must take the good news of the kingdom of God to the other towns too, for that was why I was sent.’
LUK 4:44 And he continued to make his proclamation in the synagogues of Judea.
LUK 5:1 Once, when the people were pressing round Jesus as they listened to God’s message, he happened to be standing by the shore of the Lake of Gennesaret, and saw two boats close to the shore.
LUK 5:2 The fishermen had gone away from them and were washing the nets.
LUK 5:3 So, getting into one of the boats, which belonged to Simon, Jesus asked him to push off a little way from the shore, and then sat down and taught the people from the boat.
LUK 5:4 When he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, ‘Push off into deep water, and throw out your nets for a haul.’
LUK 5:5 ‘We have been hard at work all night, Sir,’ answered Simon, ‘and have not caught anything, but, at your bidding, I will throw out the nets.’
LUK 5:6 They did so, and enclosed such a great shoal of fish that their nets began to break.
LUK 5:7 So they signalled to their partners in the other boat to come and help them; and they came and filled both the boats so full of fish that they were almost sinking.
LUK 5:8 When Simon Peter saw this, he threw himself down at Jesus’ knees, exclaiming, ‘Master, leave me, for I am a sinful man!’
LUK 5:9 For he and all who were with him were lost in amazement at the haul of fish which they had made;
LUK 5:10 and so, too, were James and John, Zebedee’s sons, who were Simon’s partners. ‘Do not be afraid,’ Jesus said to Simon, ‘from today you will catch people.’
LUK 5:11 And, when they had brought their boats to shore, they left everything, and followed him.
LUK 5:12 On one occasion Jesus was staying in a town, when he saw a man who was covered with leprosy. When the leper saw Jesus, he threw himself on his face and implored his help, ‘Master, if only you are willing, you are able to make me clean.’
LUK 5:13 Stretching out his hand, Jesus touched him, saying as he did so, ‘I am willing; become clean.’ Instantly the leprosy left the man;
LUK 5:14 and then Jesus impressed on him that he was not to say a word to anyone, ‘but,’ he added, ‘set out and show yourself to the priest, and make the offerings for your cleansing, in the manner directed by Moses, as evidence of your cure.’
LUK 5:15 However, the story about Jesus spread all the more, and great crowds came together to listen to him, and to be cured of their illnesses;
LUK 5:16 but Jesus used to withdraw to lonely places and pray.
LUK 5:17 On one of those days, when Jesus was teaching, some Pharisees and Doctors of the Law were sitting near by. (They had come from all the villages in Galilee and Judea, and from Jerusalem; and the power of the Lord was on Jesus, so that he could work cures.)
LUK 5:18 And there some men brought on a bed a man who was paralysed. They tried to get him in and lay him before Jesus;
LUK 5:19 but, finding no way of getting him in owing to the crowd, they went up on the roof and lowered him through the tiles, with his pallet, into the middle of the people and in front of Jesus.
LUK 5:20 When he saw their faith, Jesus said, ‘Friend, your sins have been forgiven you.’
LUK 5:21 The teachers of the Law and the Pharisees began debating about this. ‘Who is this man who speaks so blasphemously?’ they asked. ‘Who can forgive sins except God?’
LUK 5:22 When Jesus became aware of the way in which they were debating, he turned to them and exclaimed, ‘What are you debating with yourselves?
LUK 5:23 Which is the easier? – to say “Your sins have been forgiven you”? Or to say “Get up, and walk”?
LUK 5:24 But so that you may know that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins’ – he spoke to the paralysed man – ‘To you I say, Get up, and take up your pallet, and go to your home.’
LUK 5:25 Instantly the man stood up before their eyes, took up what he had been lying on, and went to his home, praising God.
LUK 5:26 The people, one and all, were lost in amazement, and praised God; and in great awe they said, ‘We have seen marvellous things today!’
LUK 5:27 After this, Jesus went out; and he noticed a tax-gatherer, named Levi, sitting in the tax office, and said to him, ‘Follow me.’
LUK 5:28 Levi left everything and got up and followed him.
LUK 5:29 And Levi gave a great banquet at his house, in honour of Jesus; and a large number of tax collectors and others were having dinner with them.
LUK 5:30 The Pharisees and the teachers of the Law belonging to their party complained of this to the disciples of Jesus.
LUK 5:31 In answer Jesus said, ‘It is not those who are well who need a doctor, but those who are ill.
LUK 5:32 I have not come to call the religious, but the outcast, to repent.’
LUK 5:33 ‘John’s disciples,’ they said to Jesus, ‘Often fast and say prayers, and so do the disciples of the Pharisees, while yours are eating and drinking!’
LUK 5:34 But Jesus answered them, ‘Can you make the groom’s friends fast while the groom is with them?
LUK 5:35 But the days will come – a time when the groom will be taken away from them; and they will fast then, when those days come.’
LUK 5:36 Then, as an illustration, Jesus said to them, ‘No one ever tears a piece from a new garment and puts it on an old one; for, if they do, they will not only tear the new garment, but the piece from the new one will not match the old.
LUK 5:37 And no one puts new wine into old wine-skins; for, if they do, the new wine will burst the skins, and the wine itself will run out, and the skins be lost.
LUK 5:38 But new wine must be put into fresh skins.
LUK 5:39 No one after drinking old wine wishes for new. “No,” they say, “the old is excellent.”’
LUK 6:1 One Sabbath Jesus was walking through cornfields, and his disciples were picking the ears of wheat, and rubbing them in their hands, and eating them.
LUK 6:2 ‘Why are you doing what it is not allowable to do on the Sabbath?’ asked some of the Pharisees.
LUK 6:3 Jesus’ answer was, ‘Haven’t you read even of what David did, when he was hungry, he and his companions –
LUK 6:4 That he went into the house of God, and took the consecrated bread and ate it, and gave some to his companions, though only the priests are allowed to eat it?’
LUK 6:5 Then Jesus added, ‘The Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath.’
LUK 6:6 On another Sabbath Jesus went into the synagogue and taught; and there was a man there whose right hand was withered.
LUK 6:7 The teachers of the Law and the Pharisees watched Jesus closely, to see if he would work cures on the Sabbath, so that they might find a charge to bring against him.
LUK 6:8 Jesus, however, knew what was in their minds, and said to the man whose hand was withered, ‘Stand up and come out into the middle.’ The man stood up,
LUK 6:9 and Jesus said to them, ‘I ask you, is it allowable to do good on the Sabbath – or harm? To save a life, or let it perish?’
LUK 6:10 Then, looking round at them all, he said to the man, ‘Stretch out your hand.’ The man did so; and his hand had become sound.
LUK 6:11 But the teachers of the Law and the Pharisees were mad with rage, and consulted together what they could do to Jesus.
LUK 6:12 Now about that time, Jesus went out, up the hill, to pray, and spent the whole night in prayer to God.
LUK 6:13 When day came, he summoned his disciples, and chose twelve of them, whom he also named “apostles.”
LUK 6:14 They were Simon (whom Jesus also named Peter), and his brother Andrew, James, John, Philip, Bartholomew,
LUK 6:15 Matthew, Thomas, James son of Alphaeus, Simon known as the Zealot,
LUK 6:16 Judas son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who proved a traitor.
LUK 6:17 Afterwards Jesus came down the hill with them and took his stand on a level place. With him were a large crowd of his disciples, and great numbers of people from the whole of Judea, Jerusalem, and the coast district of Tyre and Sidon,
LUK 6:18 who had come to hear him and to be restored to health. Those, too, who were troubled with foul spirits were cured;
LUK 6:19 and everyone in the crowd was trying to touch him, because a power went out from him which restored them all.
LUK 6:20 Then, raising his eyes and looking at his disciples, Jesus said: ‘Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.
LUK 6:21 Blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be satisfied. Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
LUK 6:22 Blessed are you when people hate you, and when they expel you from among them, and insult you, and reject your name as an evil thing – because of the Son of Man.
LUK 6:23 Then indeed you may be glad and dance for joy, for be sure that your reward in heaven will be great; for that is what their ancestors did to the prophets.
LUK 6:24 But alas for you who are rich, for you have had your comforts in full.
LUK 6:25 Alas for you who are sated now, for you will hunger. Alas for you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep.
LUK 6:26 Alas for you when everyone speaks well of you; for this is what their ancestors did to the false prophets.
LUK 6:27 But to you who hear I say – love your enemies, show kindness to those who hate you,
LUK 6:28 bless those who curse you, pray for those who insult you.
LUK 6:29 When someone gives one of you a blow on the cheek, offer the other cheek as well; and, when anyone takes away your cloak, do not keep back your coat either.
LUK 6:30 Give to everyone who asks of you; and, when anyone takes away what is yours, do not demand its return.
LUK 6:31 Do to others as you wish them to do to you.
LUK 6:32 If you love only those who love you, what thanks will be due to you? Why, even the outcast love those who love them!
LUK 6:33 For, if you show kindness only to those who show kindness to you, what thanks will be due to you? Even the outcast do that!
LUK 6:34 If you lend only to those from whom you expect to get something, what thanks will be due to you? Even the outcast lend to the outcast in the hope of getting as much in return!
LUK 6:35 But love your enemies, and show them kindness, and lend to them, never despairing. Then your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, for he is kind to the thankless and the bad.
LUK 6:36 Learn to be merciful – even as your Father is merciful.
LUK 6:37 Do not judge, and you will not be judged; do not condemn, and you will not be condemned. Forgive, and you will be forgiven.
LUK 6:38 Give, and others will give to you. A generous measure, pressed and shaken down, and running over, will they pour into your lap; for the standard you use will be the standard used for you.’
LUK 6:39 Then, speaking in parables, Jesus said, ‘Can one blind person guide another? Will they not both fall into a ditch?
LUK 6:40 A student is not above their teacher; yet every finished student will be like their teacher.
LUK 6:41 And why do you look at the speck of sawdust in someone’s eye, while you pay no attention at all to the plank of wood in your own?
LUK 6:42 How can you say to your friend “Friend, let me take out the speck in your eye,” while you yourself do not see the plank in your own? Hypocrite! Take out the plank from your own eye first, and then you will see clearly how to take out the speck in your friend’s.
LUK 6:43 There is no such thing as a good tree bearing worthless fruit, or, on the other hand, a worthless tree bearing good fruit.
LUK 6:44 For every tree is known by its own fruit. People do not gather figs off thorn bushes, nor pick a bunch of grapes off a bramble.
LUK 6:45 A good person, from the good stores of their heart, brings out what is good; while a bad person, from their bad stores, brings out what is bad. For what fills someone’s heart will rise to their lips.
LUK 6:46 Why do you call me “Master! Master!” and yet fail to do what I tell you?
LUK 6:47 Everyone who comes to me and listens to my teaching and acts on it – I will show you to whom they may be compared.
LUK 6:48 They may be compared to a person building a house, who dug, and went deep, and laid the foundation on the rock. Then, when a flood came, the river swept down on that house, but had no power to shake it, because it had been built well.
LUK 6:49 But those who have listened and not acted on what they have heard may be compared to a person who built a house on the ground without any foundation. The river swept down on it, and the house immediately collapsed; and great was the crash that followed.’
LUK 7:1 When Jesus had finished all he had to say to the people, he entered Capernaum.
LUK 7:2 A centurion in the Roman army had a slave whom he valued, and who was seriously ill – almost at the point of death.
LUK 7:3 And, hearing about Jesus, he sent some Jewish elders to him, with the request that he would come and save his slave’s life.
LUK 7:4 When they found Jesus, they earnestly implored him to help. ‘He deserves this favour from you.’ they said,
LUK 7:5 ‘He is devoted to our people, and even built our synagogue for us.’
LUK 7:6 So Jesus went with them. But, when he was no great distance from the house, the centurion sent some friends with the message – ‘Do not trouble yourself, Sir; for I am unworthy to receive you under my roof.
LUK 7:7 That was why I did not even venture to come to you myself; but speak, and let my manservant be cured.
LUK 7:8 For I myself am a man under the orders of others, with soldiers under me; and if I say to one of them “Go,” he goes, and to another “Come,” he comes, and to my slave “Do this,” he does it.’
LUK 7:9 Jesus was surprised to hear these words from him; and, turning to the crowd which was following him, he said, ‘I tell you, nowhere in Israel have I met with such faith as this!’
LUK 7:10 And, when the messengers returned to the house, they found the slave recovered.
LUK 7:11 Shortly after, Jesus went to a town called Nain, his disciples and a great crowd going with him.
LUK 7:12 Just as he approached the gate of the town, there was a dead man being carried out for burial – an only son, and his mother was a widow. A large number of the people of the town were with her.
LUK 7:13 When he saw her, the Master was moved with compassion for her, and he said to her, ‘Do not weep.’
LUK 7:14 Then he went up and touched the bier, and the bearers stopped; and Jesus said, ‘Young man, I am speaking to you – Rise!’
LUK 7:15 The dead man sat up and began to talk, and Jesus restored him to his mother.
LUK 7:16 Everyone was awe-struck and began praising God. ‘A great prophet has arisen among us,’ they said. ‘God has visited his people.’
LUK 7:17 And this story about Jesus spread all through Judea, and in the neighbouring countries as well.
LUK 7:18 All these events were reported to John by his disciples.
LUK 7:19 So he summoned two of them, and sent them to the Master to ask – ‘Are you “the coming one,” or are we to look for someone else?’
LUK 7:20 When these men found Jesus, they said, ‘John the Baptist has sent us to you to ask – Are you “the coming one,” or are we to look for somebody else?’
LUK 7:21 At that very time Jesus had cured many people of diseases, afflictions, and wicked spirits, and had given many blind people their sight.
LUK 7:22 So his answer to the question was, ‘Go and report to John what you have witnessed and heard – the blind recover their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are made clean, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised to life, the good news is told to the poor.
LUK 7:23 And blessed is the person who finds no hindrance in me.’
LUK 7:24 When John’s messengers had left, Jesus, speaking to the crowds, began to say with reference to John,
LUK 7:25 ‘What did you go out into the wilderness to look at? A reed waving in the wind? If not, what did you go out to see? A man dressed in rich clothing? Why, those who are accustomed to fine clothes and luxury live in royal palaces.
LUK 7:26 What then did you go to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and far more than a prophet.
LUK 7:27 This is the man of whom scripture says – “I am sending my messenger ahead of you, and he will prepare your way before you.”
LUK 7:28 There is, I tell you, no one born of a woman who is greater than John; and yet the least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.’
LUK 7:29 (All the people, when they heard this, and even the tax collectors, having accepted John’s baptism, acknowledged the justice of God.
LUK 7:30 But the Pharisees and the students of the Law, having rejected John’s baptism, frustrated God’s purpose in regard to them.)
LUK 7:31 ‘To what then,’ Jesus continued, ‘should I compare the people of the present generation? What are they like?
LUK 7:32 They are like some little children who are sitting in the marketplace and calling out to one another – “We have played the flute for you, but you have not danced; We have wailed, but you have not wept!”
LUK 7:33 For now that John the Baptist has come, not eating bread or drinking wine, you are saying “He has a demon in him”;
LUK 7:34 and now that the Son of Man has come, eating and drinking, you are saying “Here is a glutton and a wine-drinker, a friend of tax collectors and outcasts.”
LUK 7:35 And yet wisdom is vindicated by all her children.’
LUK 7:36 One of the Pharisees asked Jesus to dine with him, so Jesus went to his house and took his place at the table.
LUK 7:37 Just then a woman, who was an outcast in the town, having heard that Jesus was eating in the Pharisee’s house, brought an alabaster jar of perfume,
LUK 7:38 and placed herself behind Jesus, near his feet, weeping. Then she began to make his feet wet with her tears, and she dried them with the hair of her head, repeatedly kissing his feet and anointing them with the perfume.
LUK 7:39 When the Pharisee who had invited Jesus saw this, he said to himself, ‘Had this man been “the prophet,” he would have known who, and what sort of woman, this is who is touching him, and that she is an outcast.’
LUK 7:40 But, addressing him, Jesus said, ‘Simon, I have something to say to you.’ ‘Pray do so, teacher,’ Simon answered; and Jesus began,
LUK 7:41 ‘There were two people who were in debt to a moneylender; one owed five hundred silver coins, and the other fifty.
LUK 7:42 As they were unable to pay, he forgave them both. Which of them, do you think, will love him the more?’
LUK 7:43 ‘I suppose,’ answered Simon, ‘it will be the man to whom he forgave the greater debt.’ ‘You are right,’ said Jesus,
LUK 7:44 and then, turning to the woman, he said to Simon, ‘Do you see this woman? I came into your house – you gave me no water for my feet, but she has made my feet wet with her tears and dried them with her hair.
LUK 7:45 You did not give me one kiss, but she, from the moment I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet.
LUK 7:46 You did not anoint even my head with oil, but she has anointed my feet with perfume.
LUK 7:47 So I tell you, her great love shows that her sins, many as they are, have been pardoned. One who is pardoned little loves little.’
LUK 7:48 Then he said to the woman, ‘Your sins have been pardoned.’
LUK 7:49 The other guests began to say to one another, ‘Who is this man who even pardons sins?’
LUK 7:50 But Jesus said to the woman, ‘Your faith has delivered you; go, and peace be with you.’
LUK 8:1 Shortly afterwards, Jesus went on a journey through the towns and villages, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom of God. With him went the Twelve,
LUK 8:2 as well as some women who had been cured of wicked spirits and of infirmities. They were Mary, known as Mary of Magdala (from whom seven demons had been expelled),
LUK 8:3 and Joanna (the wife of Herod’s steward, Chuza), and Susannah, and many others – all of whom provided for Jesus and his apostles out of their own resources.
LUK 8:4 Once, when a great crowd was collecting, and, when the people of town after town were flocking to Jesus, he spoke to them in the form of a parable,
LUK 8:5 ‘The sower went out to sow his seed; and, as he was sowing, some of the seed fell along the path and was trodden on; and the wild birds ate it up.
LUK 8:6 Other seed fell on rock, and, as soon as it began to grow, because it had no moisture, it withered away.
LUK 8:7 Other seed fell in the middle of brambles, but the brambles grew up with it and choked it entirely.
LUK 8:8 Other seed fell into rich soil, and grew, and gave a hundredfold return.’ After saying this, Jesus cried aloud, ‘Let those who have ears to hear with hear.’
LUK 8:9 His disciples asked Jesus the meaning of this parable.
LUK 8:10 ‘To you,’ he said, ‘the knowledge of the hidden truths of the kingdom of God has been imparted, but to others in parables only, so that though they have eyes they may not see, and though they have ears, they may not understand.
LUK 8:11 This is the parable – The seed is God’s message.
LUK 8:12 By the seed which fell along the path are meant those who hear the message; but then comes the devil and carries away the message from their minds, to prevent their believing it and being saved.
LUK 8:13 By the seed which fell on the rock are meant those who, as soon as they hear the message, welcome it joyfully; but they have no root, and believe it only for a time, and, when the time of temptation comes, they draw back.
LUK 8:14 By that which fell among the brambles are meant those who hear the message, but who, as they go on their way, are completely choked by this world’s cares and wealth and pleasures, and bring nothing to perfection.
LUK 8:15 But by that in the good ground are meant those who, having heard the message, keep it in the good, rich soil of their hearts, and patiently yield a return.
LUK 8:16 ‘No one sets light to a lamp and then covers it with a bowl or puts it underneath a couch, but they put it on a lamp-stand, so that anyone who comes in may see the light.
LUK 8:17 Nothing is hidden which will not be brought into the light of day, not ever kept hidden which will not some day become known and come into the light of day.
LUK 8:18 Take care, then, how you listen. For, to all those who have, more will be given; while, from all those who have nothing, even what they seem to have will be taken away.’
LUK 8:19 Presently Jesus’ mother and brothers came where he was, but they were not able to join him because of the crowd.
LUK 8:20 So word was brought to him – “Your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to see you.”
LUK 8:21 His reply, spoken to them all, was, ‘My mother and my brothers are those who listen to God’s teaching and do what it says.’
LUK 8:22 One day about that time, Jesus got into a boat with his disciples and said to them, ‘Let us go across the lake.’
LUK 8:23 So they put off. While they were sailing, Jesus fell asleep. A squall swept down on the lake, and their boat was filling and they were in danger.
LUK 8:24 So the disciples came and roused him. ‘Sir, Sir,’ they cried, ‘we are lost!’ Jesus rose and rebuked the wind and the rushing waves, and they fell, and a calm followed.
LUK 8:25 ‘Where is your faith?’ he exclaimed. But in great awe and amazement they said to one another, ‘Who can this be, who commands even the winds and the waves, and they obey him?’
LUK 8:26 They reached the region of the Gerasenes, which is on the opposite side to Galilee,
LUK 8:27 and, on getting ashore, Jesus met a man, who had demons in him, coming out of the town. For a long time this man had worn no clothing, and he had not lived in a house, but in the tombs.
LUK 8:28 Catching sight of Jesus, he shrieked out and threw himself down before him, and in a loud voice exclaimed, ‘What do you want with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you not to torment me.’
LUK 8:29 For Jesus was commanding the foul spirit to come out of the man. On many occasions it had seized him, and, even when secured with chains and fetters, and watched, he would break through anything that bound him, and be driven by the demon into the wilds.
LUK 8:30 ‘What is your name?’ Jesus asked. ‘Legion,’ he answered (for many demons had taken possession of him);
LUK 8:31 and the demons begged Jesus not to order them away into the bottomless pit.
LUK 8:32 There was a herd of many pigs close by feeding on the hill-side; and the demons begged Jesus to give them leave to enter into them. Jesus gave them leave.
LUK 8:33 They came out from the man and took possession of the pigs; and the herd rushed down the steep slope into the lake and were drowned.
LUK 8:34 When the men who tended them saw what had happened, they ran away, and carried the news to the town, and to the country round.
LUK 8:35 The people went out to see what had happened, and, when they came to Jesus, they found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting, clothed and in his right mind, at Jesus’ feet; and they were awe-struck.
LUK 8:36 Those who had seen it told them how the possessed man had been delivered.
LUK 8:37 Then all the people in the region of the Gerasenes asked Jesus to leave them, for they were terrified. Jesus got into a boat and returned.
LUK 8:38 The man from whom the demons had gone out begged Jesus to let him be with him; but Jesus sent him away.
LUK 8:39 ‘Go back to your home,’ he said, ‘and relate the story of all that God has done for you.’ So the man went through the whole town and proclaimed, as he went, all that Jesus had done for him.
LUK 8:40 On his return, Jesus was welcomed by the people; for everyone was looking out for him.
LUK 8:41 And a man named Jairus, who was a synagogue leader, came to Jesus, and threw himself at Jesus’ feet, with entreaties that he would come to his house,
LUK 8:42 because his only daughter, who was about twelve years old, was dying. As Jesus was going, the people were pressing closely round him.
LUK 8:43 And a woman, who had suffered from haemorrhage for twelve years, and whom no one could cure,
LUK 8:44 came up behind and touched the tassel of his cloak. Instantly the haemorrhage ceased.
LUK 8:45 ‘Who touched me?’ Jesus asked; and, while everyone was denying having done so, Peter exclaimed, ‘Why, Sir, the people are crowding round you and pressing against you!’
LUK 8:46 ‘Somebody touched me,’ said Jesus, ‘for I felt that power had gone out from me.’
LUK 8:47 Then the woman, when she saw that she was discovered, came forward trembling, and threw herself down before him; and, in the presence of all the people, she told him her reason for touching him, and that she had been cured instantly.
LUK 8:48 ‘Daughter,’ he said, ‘your faith has delivered you. Go, and peace be with you.’
LUK 8:49 Before he had finished speaking, someone came from the house of the synagogue leader and said, ‘Your daughter is dead! Do not trouble the teacher further.’
LUK 8:50 But Jesus, hearing this, spoke to the leader, ‘Do not be afraid; only have faith, and she will yet be delivered.’
LUK 8:51 When he reached the house, he did not allow anyone to go in with him, except Peter, John, and James, and the child’s father and mother.
LUK 8:52 And everyone was weeping and mourning for her. ‘Do not weep,’ Jesus said, ‘she is not dead; she is asleep.’
LUK 8:53 They began to laugh at him, for they knew that she was dead.
LUK 8:54 But, taking her by the hand, Jesus said in a loud voice, ‘Child, rise!’
LUK 8:55 The child’s spirit returned to her, and she instantly stood up; and Jesus ordered them to give her something to eat.
LUK 8:56 Her parents were amazed, but Jesus impressed on them that they were not to tell anyone what had happened.
LUK 9:1 Jesus called the Twelve together, and gave them power and authority over all demons, as well as to cure diseases.
LUK 9:2 He sent them out as his messengers, to proclaim the kingdom of God, and to work cures.
LUK 9:3 ‘Do not,’ he said to them, ‘take anything for your journey; not even a staff, or a bag, or bread, or any silver, or a change of clothes with you.
LUK 9:4 Whatever house you go to stay in, remain there, and leave from that place.
LUK 9:5 If people do not welcome you, as you leave that town, shake even the dust off your feet, as a protest against them.’
LUK 9:6 Then they set out and went from village to village, telling the good news and curing people everywhere.
LUK 9:7 Herod the ruler heard of all that was happening, and was perplexed, because it was said by some that John must be risen from the dead.
LUK 9:8 Some again said that Elijah had appeared, and others that one of the old prophets had risen again.
LUK 9:9 But Herod himself said, ‘John I beheaded; but who is this of whom I hear such things?’ And he endeavoured to see him.
LUK 9:10 When the apostles returned, they related to Jesus all that they had done. Then Jesus went privately to a town called Bethsaida, taking the apostles with him.
LUK 9:11 But the people recognised him and followed him in crowds; and Jesus welcomed them and spoke to them about the kingdom of God, while he cured those who were in need of help.
LUK 9:12 The day was drawing to a close, when the twelve came up to him, and said, ‘Send the crowd away, so that they may make their way to the villages and farms round about, and find themselves lodgings and provisions, for we are in a lonely spot here.’
LUK 9:13 But Jesus said, ‘It is for you to give them something to eat.’ ‘We have not more than five loaves and two fish,’ they answered. ‘Unless indeed we are to go and buy food for all these people.’
LUK 9:14 (For the men among them were about five thousand.) ‘Get them seated in companies,’ was his reply, ‘about fifty in each.’
LUK 9:15 This they did, and got all the people seated.
LUK 9:16 Taking the five loaves and the two fish, Jesus looked up to heaven and said the blessing over them. Then he broke them in pieces, and gave them to his disciples to set before the people.
LUK 9:17 Everyone had sufficient to eat, and what was left of the broken pieces was picked up – twelve baskets.
LUK 9:18 Afterwards, when Jesus was alone, praying, his disciples joined him, and he asked them this question – ‘Who do the people say that I am?’
LUK 9:19 ‘John the Baptist,’ was their answer. ‘Others, however, say that you are Elijah, while others say that one of the old prophets has risen again.’
LUK 9:20 ‘But you,’ he went on, ‘who do you say that I am?’ And to this Peter answered, ‘The Christ of God.’
LUK 9:21 Jesus, however, strictly charged them not to say this to anyone;
LUK 9:22 he told them that the Son of Man must undergo much suffering, and be rejected by the elders, and chief priests, and teachers of the Law, and be put to death, and rise on the third day.
LUK 9:23 And to all present he said, ‘If any one wishes to walk in my steps, they must renounce self, and take up their cross daily, and follow me.
LUK 9:24 For whoever wishes to save their life will lose it, and whoever, for my sake, loses his life – that person will save it.
LUK 9:25 What good does it do someone if, when they has gained the whole world, they has lost or forfeited themselves?
LUK 9:26 Whoever is ashamed of me and of my teaching, the Son of Man will be ashamed of them, when he comes in his glory and the glory of the father and of the holy angels.
LUK 9:27 Indeed, I tell you, some who are standing before me will not know death, until they have seen the kingdom of God.’
LUK 9:28 About eight days after speaking these words, Jesus went up the mountain to pray, taking with him Peter, John, and James.
LUK 9:29 As he was praying, the aspect of his face was changed, and his clothing became a dazzling white.
LUK 9:30 And all at once two men were talking with Jesus; they were Moses and Elijah,
LUK 9:31 who appeared in a glorified state, and spoke of his departure, which was destined to take place at Jerusalem.
LUK 9:32 Peter and his companions had been overpowered by sleep but, suddenly becoming wide awake, they saw Jesus glorified and the two men who were standing beside him.
LUK 9:33 And, as Moses and Elijah were passing away from Jesus, Peter exclaimed, ‘Sir, it is good to be here; let us make three tents, one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.’ He did not know what he was saying;
LUK 9:34 and, while he was speaking, a cloud came down and enveloped them; and they were afraid, as they passed into the cloud;
LUK 9:35 and from the cloud came a voice which said – ‘This is my Son, the Chosen One; him you must hear.’
LUK 9:36 And, as the voice ceased, Jesus was found alone. The apostles kept silence, and told no one about any of the things that they had seen.
LUK 9:37 The next day, when they had come down from the mountain, a great crowd met Jesus.
LUK 9:38 And just then a man in the crowd shouted out, ‘Teacher, I entreat you to look at my son, for he is my only child;
LUK 9:39 all at once a spirit will seize him, suddenly shriek out, and throw him into convulsions until he foams, and will leave him only when he is utterly exhausted.
LUK 9:40 I entreated your disciples to drive the spirit out, but they could not.’
LUK 9:41 ‘Faithless and perverse generation!’ Jesus exclaimed, ‘How long must I be with you and have patience with you? Lead your son here.’
LUK 9:42 While the boy was coming up to Jesus, the demon dashed him down and threw him into convulsions. But Jesus rebuked the foul spirit, and cured the boy, and gave him back to his father.
LUK 9:43 And all present were struck with awe at the majesty of God. In the midst of the general astonishment at all that Jesus was doing, he said to his disciples,
LUK 9:44 ‘Listen carefully to my words. For the Son of Man is destined to be betrayed into the hands of his fellow men.’
LUK 9:45 But the disciples did not understand the meaning of this; it had been concealed from them so that they did not see it, and they were afraid to question him as to what he meant.
LUK 9:46 A discussion arose among the disciples as to which of them was the greatest;
LUK 9:47 and Jesus, knowing of the discussion that was occupying their thoughts, took hold of a little child, and placed it beside him,
LUK 9:48 and then said to them, ‘Anyone who, for the sake of my name, welcomes even this little child is welcoming me; and anyone who welcomes me is welcoming him who sent me as his messenger. For whoever is least among you all – that person is great.’
LUK 9:49 John said, ‘Sir, we saw a man driving out demons by using your name, and we tried to prevent him, because he does not follow you with us.’
LUK 9:50 ‘None of you must prevent him,’ Jesus said to John, ‘whoever is not against you is for you.’
LUK 9:51 As the days before his being taken up to heaven were growing few, Jesus set his face resolutely in the direction of Jerusalem; and he sent on messengers in advance.
LUK 9:52 On their way, they went into a Samaritan village to make preparations for him,
LUK 9:53 but the people there did not welcome him, because his face was set in the direction of Jerusalem.
LUK 9:54 When James and John saw this, they said, ‘Master, do you wish us to call for fire to come down from the heavens and consume them?’
LUK 9:55 But Jesus turned and rebuked them.
LUK 9:56 And they made their way to another village.
LUK 9:57 And, while they were on their way, a man said to Jesus, ‘I will follow you wherever you go.’
LUK 9:58 ‘Foxes have holes,’ he replied, ‘and wild birds their nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.’
LUK 9:59 To another man Jesus said, ‘Follow me.’ ‘Let me first go and bury my father,’ said the man.
LUK 9:60 But Jesus said, ‘Leave the dead to bury their dead; but go yourself and carry far and wide the news of the kingdom of God.’
LUK 9:61 ‘Master,’ said another, ‘I will follow you; but first let me say goodbye to my family.’
LUK 9:62 But Jesus answered, ‘No one who looks back, after putting their hand to the plough, is fitted for the kingdom of God.’
LUK 10:1 After this, the Master appointed seventy-two other disciples, and sent them on as his messengers, two and two, in advance, to every town and place that he was himself intending to visit.
LUK 10:2 ‘The harvest,’ he said, ‘is abundant, but the labourers are few. Therefore pray to the owner of the harvest to send labourers to gather in his harvest.
LUK 10:3 Now, go. Remember, I am sending you out as my messengers like lambs among wolves.
LUK 10:4 Do not take a purse with you, or a bag, or sandals; and do not stop to greet anyone on your journey.
LUK 10:5 Whatever house you go to stay at, begin by praying for a blessing on it.
LUK 10:6 Then, if anyone there is deserving of a blessing, your blessing will rest on him; but if not, it will come back on yourselves.
LUK 10:7 Remain at that same house, and eat and drink whatever they offer you; for the worker is worth their wages. Do not keep changing from one house to another.
LUK 10:8 Whatever town you visit, if the people welcome you, eat what is set before you;
LUK 10:9 cure the sick there, and tell people that the kingdom of God is close at hand.
LUK 10:10 But, whatever town you go to visit, if the people do not welcome you, go out into its streets and say
LUK 10:11 “We wipe off the dust of your town which has clung to Our feet; still, be assured that the kingdom of God is close at Hand.”
LUK 10:12 I tell you that the doom of Sodom will be more bearable on that day than the doom of that town.
LUK 10:13 Alas for you, Chorazin! Alas for you, Bethsaida! For, if the miracles which have been done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have sat in sackcloth and ashes and repented long ago.
LUK 10:14 Yet the doom of Tyre and Sidon will be more bearable at the judgment than yours.
LUK 10:15 And you, Capernaum! Will you exalt yourself to heaven? You will be flung down to Hades.
LUK 10:16 Anyone who listens to you is listening to me, and anyone who rejects you is rejecting me; while the person who rejects me is rejecting him who sent me as his messenger.’
LUK 10:17 When the seventy-two returned, they exclaimed joyfully, ‘Master, even the demons submit to us when we use your name.’
LUK 10:18 And Jesus replied, ‘I have had visions of Satan, fallen, like lightning from the heavens.
LUK 10:19 Remember, I have given you the power to trample on snakes and scorpions, and to meet all the strength of the Enemy. Nothing will ever harm you in any way.
LUK 10:20 Yet do not rejoice in the fact that the spirits submit to you, but rejoice that your names have been enrolled in heaven.’
LUK 10:21 At that same time, moved to exultation by the Holy Spirit, Jesus said: ‘I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that, though you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, you have revealed them to the childlike! Yes, Father, I thank you that this has seemed good to you.
LUK 10:22 Everything has been committed to me by my Father; nor does anyone know who the Son is, except the Father, or who the Father is, except the Son and those to whom the Son may choose to reveal him.’
LUK 10:23 Then, turning to his disciples, Jesus said to them alone, ‘Blessed are the eyes that see what you are seeing;
LUK 10:24 for, I tell you, many prophets and kings wished for the sight of the things which you are seeing, yet never heard them.’
LUK 10:25 Just then a student of the Law came forward to test Jesus further. ‘Teacher,’ he said, ‘what must I do if I am to gain eternal life?’
LUK 10:26 ‘What is said in the Law?’ answered Jesus. ‘What do you read there?’
LUK 10:27 His reply was – ‘You must love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your strength, and with all your mind; and your neighbour as you love yourself.’
LUK 10:28 ‘You have answered right,’ said Jesus, ‘Do that, and you will live.’
LUK 10:29 But the man, wanting to justify himself, said to Jesus, ‘And who is my neighbour?’
LUK 10:30 To which Jesus replied, ‘A man was once going down from Jerusalem to Jericho when he fell into the hands of robbers, who stripped him of everything, and beat him, and went away leaving him half dead.
LUK 10:31 As it chanced, a priest was going down by that road. He saw the man, but passed by on the opposite side.
LUK 10:32 A Levite, too, did the same; he came up to the spot, but, when he saw the man, passed by on the opposite side.
LUK 10:33 But a Samaritan, traveling that way, came upon the man, and, when he saw him, he was moved with compassion.
LUK 10:34 He went to him and bound up his wounds, dressing them with oil and wine, and then put him on his own mule, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.
LUK 10:35 The next day he took out two silver coins and gave them to the innkeeper. “Take care of him,” he said, “and whatever more you may spend I will myself repay you on my way back.”
LUK 10:36 Now which, do you think, of these three men,’ asked Jesus, ‘proved himself a neighbour to the man who fell into the robbers’ hands?’
LUK 10:37 ‘The one that took pity on him,’ was the answer; at which Jesus said, ‘Go and do the same yourself.’
LUK 10:38 As they continued their journey, Jesus came to a village, where a woman named Martha welcomed him to her house.
LUK 10:39 She had a sister called Mary, who seated herself at the Master’s feet, and listened to his teaching;
LUK 10:40 but Martha was distracted by the many preparations that she was making. So she went up to Jesus and said, ‘Master, do you approve of my sister’s leaving me to make preparations alone? Tell her to help me.’
LUK 10:41 ‘Martha, Martha,’ replied the Master, ‘you are anxious and trouble yourself about many things;
LUK 10:42 but only a few are necessary, or rather one. Mary has chosen the good part, and it will not be taken away from her.’
LUK 11:1 One day Jesus was at a certain place praying, and, when he had finished, one of his disciples said to him, ‘Master, teach us to pray, as John taught his disciples.’
LUK 11:2 ‘When you pray,’ Jesus answered, ‘say – “Father, may your name be held holy, your kingdom come.
LUK 11:3 Give us each day the bread that we will need;
LUK 11:4 and forgive us our sins, for we ourselves forgive everyone who wrongs us; and take us not into temptation.”’
LUK 11:5 Jesus also said to them, ‘Suppose that one of you who has a friend were to go to him in the middle of the night and say “Friend, lend me three loaves,
LUK 11:6 for a friend of mine has arrived at my house after a journey, and I have nothing to offer him;”
LUK 11:7 And suppose that the other should answer from inside “Do not trouble me; the door is already fastened, and my children and I are in bed; I cannot get up and give you anything”;
LUK 11:8 I tell you that, even though he will not get up and give him anything because he is a friend, yet because of his persistence he will rouse himself and give him what he wants.
LUK 11:9 ‘And so I say to you – Ask, and your prayer will be granted, search, and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened to you.
LUK 11:10 For the person who asks receives, everyone who searches finds, and to the person who knocks the door will be opened.
LUK 11:11 What father among you, if his son asks him for a fish, will give him a snake instead,
LUK 11:12 or, if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion?
LUK 11:13 If you, then, naturally wicked though you are, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will the Father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him!’
LUK 11:14 Once Jesus was driving out a mute demon, and, when the demon had gone out, the mute man spoke. The people were amazed at this;
LUK 11:15 but some of them said, ‘He drives out demons by the help of Beelzebul, the chief of the demons’;
LUK 11:16 while others, to test him, asked him for some sign from the heavens.
LUK 11:17 Jesus himself, however, was aware of what they were thinking, and said to them, ‘Any kingdom wholly divided against itself becomes a desolation; and a divided house falls.
LUK 11:18 So, too, if Satan is wholly divided against himself, how can his kingdom last? Yet you say that I drive out demons by the help of Beelzebul.
LUK 11:19 But, if it is by Beelzebul’s help that I drive out demons, by whose help is it that your own sons drive them out? Therefore they will themselves be your judges.
LUK 11:20 But, if it is by the hand of God that I drive out demons, then the kingdom of God must already be upon you.
LUK 11:21 When a strong man is keeping guard, fully armed, over his own mansion, his property is in safety;
LUK 11:22 but, when one still stronger has attacked and overpowered him, he takes away all the weapons on which the other had relied, and divides his spoil.
LUK 11:23 Whoever is not with me is against me, and the person who does not help me to gather is scattering.
LUK 11:24 No sooner does a foul spirit leave someone, than it passes through places where there is no water, in search of rest; and finding none, it says “I will go back to the home which I left”;
LUK 11:25 but, on coming there, it finds it unoccupied, swept, and put in order.
LUK 11:26 Then it goes and brings with it seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and they go in, and make their home there; and the last state of that person proves to be worse than the first.’
LUK 11:27 As Jesus was saying this, a woman in the crowd, raising her voice, exclaimed, ‘Happy was the mother who bore you and nursed you!’
LUK 11:28 But Jesus replied, ‘Rather, happy are those who listen to God’s message and keep it.’
LUK 11:29 As the crowds increased, Jesus began to speak, ‘This generation is a wicked generation. It demands a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Jonah.
LUK 11:30 For, as Jonah became a sign to the people of Nineveh, so will the Son of Man be to this generation.
LUK 11:31 At the judgment the Queen of the South will rise up with the people of this generation, and will condemn them, because she came from the ends of the earth to listen to the wisdom of Solomon; and here is more than a Solomon!
LUK 11:32 At the judgment the men of Nineveh will stand up with this generation, and will condemn it, because they repented at Jonah’s proclamation; and here is more than a Jonah!
LUK 11:33 No one lights a lamp, and then puts it in the cellar or under a basket, but he puts it on the lamp-stand, so that anyone who comes in may see the light.
LUK 11:34 The lamp of the body is your eye. When your eye is unclouded, your whole body, also, is lit up; but, as soon as your eye is diseased, your body, also, is darkened.
LUK 11:35 Take care, therefore, that the inner light is not darkness.
LUK 11:36 If, then, your whole body is lit up, and no corner of it darkened, the whole will be lit up, just as when a lamp gives you light by its brilliance.’
LUK 11:37 As Jesus finished speaking, a Pharisee asked him to breakfast with him, and Jesus went in and took his place at the table.
LUK 11:38 The Pharisee noticed, to his astonishment, that Jesus omitted the ceremonial washing before breakfast.
LUK 11:39 But the Master said to him, ‘You Pharisees do, it is true, clean the outside of the cup and of the plate, but inside you yourselves are filled with greed and wickedness.
LUK 11:40 Fools! Did not the maker of the outside make the inside too?
LUK 11:41 Only give away what is in them in charity, and at once you have the whole clean.
LUK 11:42 But alas for you Pharisees! You pay tithes on mint, rue, and herbs of all kinds, and pass over justice and love to God. These last you ought to have put into practice without neglecting the first.
LUK 11:43 Alas for you Pharisees! You delight to have the front seat in the synagogues, and to be greeted in the markets with respect.
LUK 11:44 Alas for you! You are like unsuspected graves, over which men walk unawares.’
LUK 11:45 Here one of the students of the Law interrupted him by saying, ‘Teacher, when you say this, you are insulting us also.’
LUK 11:46 But Jesus went on, ‘Alas for you, too, you students of the Law! You load people with loads that are too heavy to carry, but do not, yourselves, touch them with one of your fingers.
LUK 11:47 Alas for you! You build the monuments of the prophets whom your ancestors killed.
LUK 11:48 You are actually witnesses to your ancestors’ acts and show your approval of them, because, while they killed the prophets, you build tombs for them.
LUK 11:49 That is why the wisdom of God said – “I will send to them prophets and apostles,
LUK 11:50 some of whom they will persecute and kill, in order that the blood of all the prophets that has been spilt since the creation of the world may be exacted from this generation –
LUK 11:51 from the blood of Abel down to the blood of Zechariah, who was slain between the altar and the house of God.” Yes, I tell you, it will be exacted from this generation.
LUK 11:52 Alas for you students of the Law! You have taken away the key of the door of knowledge. You have not gone in yourselves and you have hindered those who try to go in.’
LUK 11:53 When Jesus left the house, the teachers of the Law and the Pharisees began to press him hard and question him closely on many subjects,
LUK 11:54 laying traps for him, so as to seize on anything that he might say.
LUK 12:1 Meanwhile the people had gathered in thousands, so that they trod on one another, when Jesus, addressing himself to his disciples, began by saying to them, ‘Be on your guard against the leaven – that is, the hypocrisy – of the Pharisees.
LUK 12:2 There is nothing, however covered up, which will not be uncovered, nor anything kept secret which will not become known.
LUK 12:3 So all that you have said in the dark will be heard in the light, and what you have spoken in the ear, within closed doors, will be proclaimed on the housetops.
LUK 12:4 To you who are my friends I say, Do not be afraid of those who kill the body, but after that can do no more.
LUK 12:5 I will show you of whom you should be afraid. Be afraid of him who, after killing you, has the power to fling you into Gehenna. Yes, I say, be afraid of him.
LUK 12:6 Are not five sparrows sold for two copper coins? Yet not one of them has escaped God’s notice.
LUK 12:7 No, even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Do not be afraid; you are of more value than many sparrows.
LUK 12:8 Everyone, I tell you, who publicly acknowledges me, the Son of Man, also, will acknowledge before God’s angels;
LUK 12:9 but the person who publicly disowns me will be altogether disowned before God’s angels.
LUK 12:10 Everyone who will say anything against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but for the person who slanders the Holy Spirit there will be no forgiveness.
LUK 12:11 Whenever they take you before the synagogue Courts or the magistrates or other authorities, do not be anxious as to how you will defend yourselves, or what your defence will be, or what you will say;
LUK 12:12 for the Holy Spirit will show you at the moment what you ought to say.’
LUK 12:13 ‘Teacher,’ a man in the crowd said to Jesus, ‘tell my brother to share the property with me.’
LUK 12:14 But Jesus said to him, ‘Man, who made me a judge or an arbiter between you?’
LUK 12:15 And then he added, ‘Take care to keep yourselves free from every form of covetousness; for even in the height of their prosperity a person’s true life does not depend on what they have.’
LUK 12:16 Then Jesus told them this parable – ‘There was once a rich man whose land was very fertile;
LUK 12:17 and he began to ask himself “What will I do, for I have nowhere to store my crops?
LUK 12:18 This is what I will do,” he said; “I will pull down my barns and build larger ones, and store all my grain and my goods in them;
LUK 12:19 and I will say to myself, Now you have plenty of good things put by for many years; take your ease, eat, drink, and enjoy yourself.”
LUK 12:20 But God said to the man “Fool! This very night your life is being demanded; and as for all you have prepared – who will have it?”
LUK 12:21 So it is with those who lay by wealth for themselves and are not rich to the glory of God.’
LUK 12:22 And Jesus said to his disciples, ‘That is why I say to you, Do not be anxious about the life here – what you can get to eat; or about your body – what you can get to wear.
LUK 12:23 For life is more than food, and the body than its clothes.
LUK 12:24 Think of the ravens – they neither sow nor reap; they have neither storehouse nor barn; and yet God feeds them! And how much more precious are you than birds!
LUK 12:25 But which of you, by being anxious, can prolong your life a moment?
LUK 12:26 And, if you cannot do even the smallest thing, why be anxious about other things?
LUK 12:27 Think of the lilies, and how they grow. They neither toil nor spin; yet, I tell you, even Solomon in all his splendour was not robed like one of these.
LUK 12:28 If, even in the field, God so clothes the grass which is living today and tomorrow will be thrown into the oven, how much more will he clothe you, you of little faith!
LUK 12:29 And you – do not be always seeking what you can get to eat or what you can get to drink; and do not waver.
LUK 12:30 These are the things for which all the nations of the world are seeking, and your Father knows that you need them.
LUK 12:31 No, seek his kingdom, and these things will be added for you.
LUK 12:32 So do not be afraid, my little flock, for your Father has been pleased to give you the kingdom.
LUK 12:33 ‘Sell what belongs to you, and give in charity. Make yourselves purses that will not wear out – an inexhaustible treasure in heaven, where no thief comes near, or moth works ruin.
LUK 12:34 For where your treasure is, there also will your heart be.
LUK 12:35 Make yourselves ready, with your lamps alight;
LUK 12:36 and be like servants who are waiting for their Master’s return from his wedding, so that, when he comes and knocks, they may open the door for him at once.
LUK 12:37 Happy are those servants whom, on his return, the Master will find watching. I tell you that he will make himself ready, and have them take their places at the table, and will come and serve them.
LUK 12:38 Whether it is late at night, or in the early morning that he comes, if he finds all as it should be, then happy are they.
LUK 12:39 This you do know, that, had the owner of the house known at what time the thief was coming, he would have been on the watch, and would not have let his house be broken into.
LUK 12:40 You must also prepare, for when you are least expecting him the Son of Man will come.’
LUK 12:41 ‘Master,’ said Peter, ‘are you telling this parable with reference to us or to everyone?’
LUK 12:42 ‘Who, then,’ replied the Master, ‘is that trustworthy steward, the careful man, who will be placed by his master over his establishment, to give them their rations at the proper time?
LUK 12:43 Happy will that servant be whom his master, when he comes home, will find doing this.
LUK 12:44 His master, I tell you, will put him in charge of the whole of his property.
LUK 12:45 But should that servant say to himself “My master is a long time coming,” and begin to beat the menservants and the maidservants, and to eat and drink and get drunk,
LUK 12:46 that servant’s master will come on a day when he does not expect him, and at an hour of which he is unaware, and will flog him severely and assign him his place among the untrustworthy.
LUK 12:47 The servant who knows his master’s wishes and yet does not prepare and act accordingly will receive many lashes;
LUK 12:48 while one who does not know his master’s wishes, but acts so as to deserve a flogging, will receive but few. From everyone to whom much has been given much will be expected, and from the man to whom much has been entrusted the more will be demanded.
LUK 12:49 I came to cast fire on the earth; and what more can I wish, if it is already kindled?
LUK 12:50 There is a baptism that I must undergo, and how great is my distress until it is over!
LUK 12:51 Do you think that I am here to bring peace on earth? No, I tell you, but to cause division.
LUK 12:52 For from this time, if there are five people in a house, they will be divided, three against two, and two against three.
LUK 12:53 Father will be opposed to son and son to father, mother to daughter and daughter to mother, mother-in-law to her daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law to her mother-in-law.’
LUK 12:54 And to the people Jesus said, ‘When you see a cloud rising in the west, you say at once “There is a storm coming,” and come it does.
LUK 12:55 And when you see that the wind is in the south, you say “It will be burning hot,” and so it proves.
LUK 12:56 Hypocrites! You know how to judge of the earth and the sky; how is it, then, that you cannot judge of this time?
LUK 12:57 Why don’t you yourselves decide what is right?
LUK 12:58 When, for instance, you are going with your opponent before a magistrate, on your way to the court do your best to be quit of him; otherwise he might drag you before the judge, then the judge will hand you over to the bailiff of the court, and the bailiff throw you into prison.
LUK 12:59 You will not, I tell you, come out until you have paid the very last cent.’
LUK 13:1 Just at that time some people had come to tell Jesus about the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with the blood of their sacrifices.
LUK 13:2 ‘Do you suppose,’ replied Jesus, ‘that, because these Galileans have suffered in this way, they were worse sinners than any other Galileans?
LUK 13:3 No, I tell you; but, unless you repent, you will all perish as they did.
LUK 13:4 Or those eighteen men at Siloam on whom the tower fell, killing them all, do you suppose that they were worse offenders than any other inhabitants of Jerusalem?
LUK 13:5 No, I tell you; but, unless you repent, you will all perish in the same manner.’
LUK 13:6 And Jesus told them this parable – ‘A man, who had a fig tree growing in his vineyard, came to look for fruit on it, but could not find any.
LUK 13:7 So he said to his gardener “Three years now I have come to look for fruit on this fig tree, without finding any! Cut it down. Why should it rob the soil?”
LUK 13:8 “Leave it this one year more, Sir,” the man answered, “until I have dug round it and manured it.
LUK 13:9 Then, if it bears in future, well and good; but if not, you can have it cut down.”’
LUK 13:10 Jesus was teaching on a Sabbath in one of the synagogues,
LUK 13:11 and he saw before him a woman who for eighteen years had suffered from weakness owing to her having an evil spirit in her. She was bent double, and was wholly unable to raise herself.
LUK 13:12 When Jesus saw her, he called her to him, and said, ‘Woman, you are released from your weakness.’
LUK 13:13 He placed his hands on her, and she was instantly made straight, and began to praise God.
LUK 13:14 But the synagogue leader, indignant that Jesus had worked the cure on the Sabbath, intervened and said to the people, ‘There are six days on which work ought to be done; come to be cured on one of those, and not on the Sabbath.’
LUK 13:15 ‘You hypocrites!’ the Master answered him. ‘Does not everyone of you let your ox or your donkey loose from its manger, and take it out to drink, on the Sabbath?
LUK 13:16 But this woman, a daughter of Abraham, who has been kept in bondage by Satan for now eighteen years, ought not she to have been released from her bondage on the Sabbath?’
LUK 13:17 As he said this, his opponents all felt ashamed; but all the people rejoiced to see all the wonderful things that he was doing.
LUK 13:18 So Jesus said, ‘What is the kingdom of God like? And to what can I liken it?
LUK 13:19 It is like a mustard seed which a man took and put in his garden. The seed grew and became a tree, and the wild birds roosted in its branches.’
LUK 13:20 And again Jesus said, ‘To what can I liken the kingdom of God?
LUK 13:21 It is like some yeast which a woman took and covered in three pecks of flour, until the whole had risen.’
LUK 13:22 Jesus went through towns and villages, teaching as he went, and making his way towards Jerusalem.
LUK 13:23 ‘Master,’ someone asked, ‘are there but few in the path of salvation?’ And Jesus answered,
LUK 13:24 ‘Strive to go in by the narrow door. Many, I tell you, will seek to go in, but they will not be able,
LUK 13:25 when once the master of the house has got up and shut the door, while you begin to say, as you stand outside and knock, “Sir, open the door for us.” His answer will be – “I do not know where you come from.”
LUK 13:26 Then you will begin to say “We have eaten and drunk in your presence, and you have taught in our streets,” and his reply will be –
LUK 13:27 “I do not know where you come from. Leave my presence, all you who are living in wickedness.”
LUK 13:28 There, there will be weeping and grinding of teeth, when you see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, while you yourselves are being driven outside.
LUK 13:29 People will come from East and West, and from North and South, and take their places at the banquet in the kingdom of God.
LUK 13:30 There are some who are last now who will then be first, and some who are first now who will then be last!’
LUK 13:31 Just then some Pharisees came up to Jesus and said, ‘Go away and leave this place, for Herod wants to kill you.’
LUK 13:32 But Jesus answered, ‘Go and say to that fox “Look you, I am driving out demons and will be completing cures today and tomorrow, and on the third day I will have done.”
LUK 13:33 But today and tomorrow and the day after I must go on my way, because it cannot be that a prophet should meet his end outside Jerusalem.
LUK 13:34 Jerusalem! Jerusalem! You who slays the prophets and stones the messengers sent to you – Oh, how often have I wished to gather your children round me, as a hen takes her brood under her wings, and you would not come!
LUK 13:35 Verily your house is left to you desolate! And never, I tell you, will you see me, until you say – “Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord.”’
LUK 14:1 On one occasion, as Jesus was going, on a Sabbath into the house of one of the leading Pharisees to dine, they were watching him closely.
LUK 14:2 There he saw before him a man who was suffering from dropsy.
LUK 14:3 ‘Is it allowable,’ said Jesus, addressing the students of the Law and the Pharisees, ‘to work a cure on the Sabbath, or is it not?’
LUK 14:4 They remained silent. Jesus took hold of the man and cured him, and sent him away.
LUK 14:5 And he said to them, ‘Which of you, finding that your son or your ox has fallen into a well, will not immediately pull them out on the Sabbath day?’
LUK 14:6 And they could not make any answer to that.
LUK 14:7 Observing that the guests were choosing the best places for themselves, Jesus told them this parable –
LUK 14:8 ‘When you are invited by anyone to a wedding banquet, do not seat yourself in the best place. Someone of higher rank might have been invited by your host;
LUK 14:9 and the host who invited you both will come and say to you “Make room for this person,” and then you will begin in confusion to take the lowest place.
LUK 14:10 No, when you are invited, go and take the lowest place, so that, when the host who has invited you comes, he may say to you “Friend, come higher up”; and then you will be honoured in the eyes of all your fellow guests.
LUK 14:11 For everyone who exalts themselves will be humbled, and everyone who humbles themselves will be exalted.’
LUK 14:12 Then Jesus went on to say to the man who had invited him, ‘When you give a breakfast or a dinner, do not ask your friends, or your brothers or sisters, or your relatives, or rich neighbours, because they might invite you in return, and so you should be repaid.
LUK 14:13 No, when you entertain, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind;
LUK 14:14 and then you will be happy indeed, since they cannot reward you; for you will be rewarded at the resurrection of the just.’
LUK 14:15 One of the guests heard what he said and exclaimed, ‘Happy will be the person who will eat bread in the kingdom of God!’
LUK 14:16 But Jesus said to him, ‘A man was once giving a great dinner. He invited many people,
LUK 14:17 and sent his servant, when it was time for the dinner, to say to those who had been invited “Come, for everything is now ready.”
LUK 14:18 They all with one accord began to ask to be excused. The first said to the servant “I have bought a field and am obliged to go and look at it. I must ask you to consider me excused.”
LUK 14:19 The next said “I have bought five pairs of bullocks, and I am on my way to try them. I must ask you to consider me excused”;
LUK 14:20 while the next said “I am just married, and for that reason I am unable to come.”
LUK 14:21 On his return the servant told his master all these answers. Then in anger the owner of the house said to his servant “Go out at once into the streets and alleys of the town, and bring in here the poor, and the crippled, and the blind, and the lame.”
LUK 14:22 Presently the servant said “Sir, your order has been carried out, and still there is room.”
LUK 14:23 “Go out,” the master said, “into the roads and hedgerows, and make people come in, so that my house may be filled;
LUK 14:24 for I tell you all that not one of those people who were invited will taste my dinner.”’
LUK 14:25 One day, when great crowds of people were walking with Jesus, he turned and said to them,
LUK 14:26 ‘If any one comes to me and does not hate their father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brothers, and sisters, yes and even their life, he can be no disciple of mine.
LUK 14:27 Whoever does not carry their own cross, and walk in my steps, can be no disciple of mine.
LUK 14:28 Why, which of you, when you want to build a tower, does not first sit down and reckon the cost, to see if you have enough to complete it? –
LUK 14:29 Otherwise, if you have laid the foundation and are not able to finish it, everyone who sees it will laugh at you,
LUK 14:30 and say “Here is a person who began to build and was not able to finish!”
LUK 14:31 Or what king, when he is setting out to fight another king, does not first sit down and consider if with ten thousand men he is able to meet one who is coming against him with twenty thousand?
LUK 14:32 And if he cannot, then, while the other is still at a distance, he sends envoys and asks for terms of peace.
LUK 14:33 And so with everyone of you who does not bid farewell to all you have – you cannot be a disciple of mine.
LUK 14:34 Yes, salt is good; but, if the salt itself should lose its strength, what will be used to season it?
LUK 14:35 It is not fit either for the land or for the manure heap. People throw it away. Let those who have ears to hear with hear!’
LUK 15:1 The tax collectors and the outcasts were all drawing near to Jesus to listen to him;
LUK 15:2 but the Pharisees and the teachers of the Law found fault. ‘This man always welcomes outcasts, and takes meals with them!’ they complained.
LUK 15:3 So Jesus told them this parable –
LUK 15:4 ‘Who among you who has a hundred sheep, and has lost one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine out in the open country, and go after the lost sheep until he finds it?
LUK 15:5 And, when he has found it, he puts it on his shoulders rejoicing;
LUK 15:6 and, on reaching home, he calls his friends and his neighbours together, and says “Come and rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost.”
LUK 15:7 So, I tell you, there will be more rejoicing in heaven over one outcast who repents, than over ninety-nine religious people, who have no need to repent.
LUK 15:8 Or again, what woman who has ten silver coins, if she loses one of them, does not light a lamp, and sweep the house, and search carefully until she finds it?
LUK 15:9 And, when she has found it, she calls her friends and neighbours together, and says “Come and rejoice with me, for I have found the coin which I lost.”
LUK 15:10 So, I tell you, there is rejoicing in the presence of God’s angels over one outcast who repents.’
LUK 15:11 Then Jesus continued, ‘A man had two sons;
LUK 15:12 and the younger of them said to his father “Father, give me my share of the inheritance.” So the father divided the property between them.
LUK 15:13 A few days later the younger son got together all that he had, and went away into a distant land; and there he squandered his inheritance by leading a dissolute life.
LUK 15:14 After he has spent all that he had, there was a severe famine through all that country, and he began to be in actual want.
LUK 15:15 So he went and engaged himself to one of the people of that country, who sent him into his fields to tend pigs.
LUK 15:16 He even longed to satisfy his hunger with the bean-pods on which the pigs were feeding; and no one gave him anything.
LUK 15:17 But, when he came to himself, he said “How many of my father’s hired servants have more bread than they can eat, while here am I starving to death!
LUK 15:18 I will get up and go to my father, and say to him ‘Father, I sinned against heaven and against you;
LUK 15:19 I am no longer fit to be called your son; make me one of your hired servants.’”
LUK 15:20 And he got up and went to his father. But, while he was still a long way off, his father saw him and was deeply moved; he ran and threw his arms round his neck and kissed him.
LUK 15:21 “Father,” the son said, “I sinned against heaven and against you; I am no longer fit to be called your son; make me one of your hired servants.”
LUK 15:22 But the father turned to his servants and said “Be quick and fetch a robe – the very best – and put it on him; give him a ring for his finger and sandals for his feet;
LUK 15:23 and bring the fattened calf and kill it, and let us eat and make merry;
LUK 15:24 for here is my son who was dead, and is alive again, was lost, and is found.” So they began making merry.
LUK 15:25 Meanwhile the elder son was out in the fields; but, on coming home, when he got near the house, he heard music and dancing,
LUK 15:26 and he called one of the servants and asked what it all meant.
LUK 15:27 “Your brother has come back,” the servant told him, “and your father has killed the fattened calf, because he has him back safe and sound.”
LUK 15:28 This made him angry, and he would not go in. But his father came out and begged him to do so.
LUK 15:29 “No,” he said to his father, “look at all the years I have been serving you, without ever once disobeying you, and yet you have never given me even a young goat, so that I might have a party with my friends.
LUK 15:30 But, no sooner has this son of yours come, who has eaten up your property in the company of prostitutes, than you have killed the fattened calf for him.”
LUK 15:31 “Child,” the father answered, “you are always with me, and everything that I have is yours.
LUK 15:32 But how could we not celebrate and rejoice? Here is your brother who was dead and is alive, who was lost and is found.”’
LUK 16:1 Jesus said to his disciples, ‘There was a rich man who had a steward; and this steward was maliciously accused to him of wasting his estate.
LUK 16:2 So the master called him and said “What is this that I hear about you? Give in your accounts, for you cannot act as steward any longer.”
LUK 16:3 “What am I to do,” the steward asked himself, “now that my master is taking the steward’s place away from me? I have not strength to dig, and I am ashamed to beg.
LUK 16:4 I know what I will do, so that, as soon as I am turned out of my stewardship, people may welcome me into their homes.”
LUK 16:5 One by one he called up his master’s debtors. “How much do you owe my master?” he asked of the first.
LUK 16:6 “Four hundred and forty gallons of oil,” answered the man. “Here is your agreement,” he said; “sit down at once and make it two hundred and twenty.”
LUK 16:7 And you, the steward said to the next, “how much do you owe?” “Seventy quarters of wheat,” he replied. “Here is your agreement,” the steward said; “make it fifty-six.”
LUK 16:8 His master complimented this dishonest steward on the shrewdness of his action. And indeed men of the world are shrewder in dealing with their fellow men than those who have the light.
LUK 16:9 And I say to you “Win friends for yourselves with your dishonest money,” so that, when it comes to an end, there may be a welcome for you into the Eternal Home.
LUK 16:10 The person who is trustworthy in the smallest matter is trustworthy in a great one also; and the person who is dishonest in the smallest matter is dishonest in a great one also.
LUK 16:11 So, if you have proved untrustworthy with the dishonest money, who will trust you with the true?
LUK 16:12 And, if you have proved untrustworthy with what does not belong to us, who will give you what is really our own?
LUK 16:13 No servant can serve two masters, for, either they will hate one and love the other, or else they will attach themselves to one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and money.’
LUK 16:14 All this was said within hearing of the Pharisees, who were lovers of money, and they began to sneer at Jesus.
LUK 16:15 ‘You,’ said Jesus, ‘are the ones who justify themselves before the world, but God can read your hearts; and what is highly esteemed among people may be an abomination in the sight of God.
LUK 16:16 The Law and the prophets sufficed until the time of John. Since then the good news of the kingdom of God has been told, and everybody has been forcing their way into it.
LUK 16:17 It would be easier for the heavens and the earth to disappear than for one stroke of a letter in the Law to be lost.
LUK 16:18 Everyone who divorces his wife and marries another woman is an adulterer, and the man who marries a divorced woman is an adulterer.
LUK 16:19 There was once a rich man, who dressed in purple robes and fine linen, and feasted every day in great splendour.
LUK 16:20 Near his gateway there had been laid a beggar named Lazarus, who was covered with sores,
LUK 16:21 and who longed to satisfy his hunger with what fell from the rich man’s table. Even the dogs came and licked his sores.
LUK 16:22 After a time the beggar died, and was taken by the angels to be with Abraham. The rich man also died and was buried.
LUK 16:23 In Hades he looked up in his torment, and saw Abraham at a distance and Lazarus at his side.
LUK 16:24 So he called out “Pity me, Father Abraham, and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am suffering agony in this flame.”
LUK 16:25 “Child,” answered Abraham, “remember that you in your lifetime received what you thought desirable, just as Lazarus received what was not desirable; but now he has his consolation here, while you are suffering agony.
LUK 16:26 And not only that, but between you and us there lies a great chasm, so that those who wish to pass from here to you cannot, nor can they cross from there to us.”
LUK 16:27 “Then, Father,” he said, “I beg you to send Lazarus to my father’s house
LUK 16:28 where I have five brothers, to warn them, so that they will not also come to this place of torture.”
LUK 16:29 “They have the writings of Moses and the prophets,” replied Abraham. “Let them listen to them.”
LUK 16:30 “But, Father Abraham,” he urged, “if someone from the dead were to go to them, they would repent.”
LUK 16:31 “If they do not listen to Moses and the prophets,” answered Abraham, “they will not be persuaded, even if someone were to rise from the dead.”’
LUK 17:1 Jesus said to his disciples, ‘It is inevitable that there should be temptations but sorrow awaits the person who does the tempting!
LUK 17:2 It would be better for them if they had been flung into the sea with a millstone round their neck, rather than that they should cause even one of these little ones to stumble.
LUK 17:3 Be on your guard! If your brother or sister does wrong, rebuke them; but if they repent, forgive them.
LUK 17:4 Even if they wrong you seven times a day, but turns to you every time and says “I am sorry,” you must forgive them.’
LUK 17:5 ‘Give us more faith,’ said the apostles to the Master;
LUK 17:6 but the Master said, ‘If your faith were only like a mustard seed, you could say to this mulberry tree “Be uprooted and planted in the sea,” and it would obey you.
LUK 17:7 Which of you, if he had a servant ploughing, or tending the sheep, would say to him, when he came in from the fields, “Come at once and take your place at the table,”
LUK 17:8 Instead of saying “Prepare my dinner, and then make yourself ready and serve me while I am eating and drinking, and after that you will eat and drink yourself”?
LUK 17:9 Does he feel grateful to his servant for doing what he is told?
LUK 17:10 And so with you – when you have done all that you have been told, still say “We are but useless servants; we have done no more than we ought to have done.”’
LUK 17:11 On the way to Jerusalem Jesus passed between Samaria and Galilee.
LUK 17:12 As he was entering a village, ten lepers met him.
LUK 17:13 Standing still, some distance off, they called out loudly, ‘Jesus! Sir! Pity us!’
LUK 17:14 When Jesus saw them, he said, ‘Go and show yourselves to the priest.’ And, as they were on their way, they were made clean.
LUK 17:15 One of them, finding he was cured, came back, praising God loudly,
LUK 17:16 and threw himself on his face at Jesus’ feet, thanking him for what he had done; and this man was a Samaritan.
LUK 17:17 ‘Were not all the ten made clean? exclaimed Jesus. But the nine – where are they?
LUK 17:18 Were there none to come back and praise God except this foreigner?
LUK 17:19 Get up,’ he said to him, ‘and go on your way. Your faith has delivered you.’
LUK 17:20 Being once asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God was to come, Jesus answered, ‘The kingdom of God does not come in a way that can be seen,
LUK 17:21 nor will people say “Look, here it is!” or “There it is!”; for the kingdom of God is within you!
LUK 17:22 The day will come,’ he said to his disciples, ‘when you will long to see but one of the days of the Son of Man, and will not see it.
LUK 17:23 People will say to you “There he is!” Or “Here he is!” Do not go and follow them.
LUK 17:24 For, just as lightning will lighten and flare from one side of the heavens to the other, so will it be with the Son of Man.
LUK 17:25 But first he must undergo much suffering, and he must be rejected by the present generation.
LUK 17:26 As it was in the days of Noah, so will it be again in the days of the Son of Man.
LUK 17:27 They were eating and drinking and marrying and being married, up to the very day on which Noah entered the ark, and then the flood came and destroyed them all.
LUK 17:28 So, too, in the days of Lot. People were eating, drinking, buying, selling, planting, building;
LUK 17:29 but, on the very day on which Lot came out of Sodom, it rained fire and sulphur from the skies and destroyed them all.
LUK 17:30 It will be the same on the day on which the Son of Man reveals himself.
LUK 17:31 On that day, if a person is on their house-top and their goods in the house, they must not go down to get them; nor again must one who is on the farm turn back.
LUK 17:32 Remember Lot’s wife.
LUK 17:33 Whoever is eager to get the most out of their life will lose it; but whoever will lose it will preserve it.
LUK 17:34 On that night, I tell you, of two people on the same bed, one will be taken and the other left;
LUK 17:35 of two women grinding grain together, one will be taken and the other left.’
LUK 17:36 
LUK 17:37 ‘Where will it be, Master?’ asked the disciples. ‘Where there is a body,’ said Jesus, ‘there will the vultures flock.’
LUK 18:1 Jesus told his disciples a parable to show them that they should always pray and never despair.
LUK 18:2 ‘There was,’ he said, ‘in a certain town a judge, who had no fear of God nor regard for people.
LUK 18:3 In the same town there was a widow who went to him again and again, and said “Grant me justice against my opponent.”
LUK 18:4 For a time the judge refused, but afterwards he said to himself “Although I am without fear of God or regard for people,
LUK 18:5 yet, as this widow is so troublesome, I will grant her justice, to stop her from plaguing me with her endless visits.”’
LUK 18:6 Then the Master added, ‘Listen to what this iniquitous judge says!
LUK 18:7 And God – won’t he see that his own people, who cry to him night and day, have justice done them – though he holds his hand?
LUK 18:8 He will, I tell you, give them justice soon enough! Yet, when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on earth?’
LUK 18:9 Another time, speaking to people who were satisfied that they were religious, and who regarded everyone else with scorn, Jesus told this parable –
LUK 18:10 ‘Two men went up into the Temple Courts to pray. One was a Pharisee and the other a tax-gatherer.
LUK 18:11 The Pharisee stood forward and began praying to himself in this way – “God, I thank you that I am not like other men – thieves, rogues, adulterers – or even like this tax-gatherer.
LUK 18:12 I fast twice a week, and give a tenth of everything I get to God.”
LUK 18:13 Meanwhile the tax-gatherer stood at a distance, not venturing even to raise his eyes to heaven, but he kept striking his breast and saying “God, have mercy on me, a sinner.”
LUK 18:14 This man, I tell you, went home pardoned, rather than the other. For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, while everyone who humbles himself will be exalted.’
LUK 18:15 Some of the people were bringing even their babies to Jesus, for him to touch them; but, when the disciples saw it, they began to find fault with those who had brought them.
LUK 18:16 Jesus, however, called the little children to him. ‘Let the little children come to me,’ he said, ‘and do not hinder them, for it is to the childlike that the kingdom of God belongs.
LUK 18:17 I tell you, unless a man receives the kingdom of God like a child, he will not enter it at all.’
LUK 18:18 And one of the leaders asked Jesus this question – ‘Good teacher, what must I do if I am to gain eternal life?’
LUK 18:19 ‘Why do you call me good?’ answered Jesus. ‘No one is good but God.
LUK 18:20 You know the commandments – Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not say what is false about others, Honour your father and your mother.’
LUK 18:21 ‘I have observed all these,’ he replied, ‘from childhood.’
LUK 18:22 Hearing this, Jesus said to him, ‘There is one thing still lacking in you; sell everything that you have, and distribute to the poor, and you will have wealth in heaven; then come and follow me.’
LUK 18:23 But the man became greatly distressed on hearing this, for he was extremely rich.
LUK 18:24 Seeing this, Jesus said to his disciples, ‘How hard it is for the wealthy to enter the kingdom of God!
LUK 18:25 It is easier, indeed, for a camel to get through a needle’s eye than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God!’
LUK 18:26 ‘Then who can be saved?’ asked those who heard this.
LUK 18:27 But Jesus said, ‘What is impossible with people is possible with God.’
LUK 18:28 ‘But we,’ said Peter, ‘we left what belonged to us and followed you.’
LUK 18:29 ‘I tell you,’ he answered, ‘that there is no one who has left house, or wife, or brothers, or parents, or children, for the sake of the kingdom of God,
LUK 18:30 who will not receive many times as much in the present, and in the age that is coming eternal life.’
LUK 18:31 Gathering the Twelve round him, Jesus said to them, ‘Listen! We are going up to Jerusalem; and there everything that is written in the prophets will be done to the Son of Man.
LUK 18:32 For he will be given up to the Gentiles, mocked, insulted and spat on;
LUK 18:33 they will scourge him, and then put him to death; and on the third day he will rise again.’
LUK 18:34 The apostles did not comprehend any of this. His meaning was unintelligible to them and they did not understand what he was saying.
LUK 18:35 As Jesus was getting near Jericho, a blind man was sitting by the roadside, begging.
LUK 18:36 Hearing a crowd going by, the man asked what was the matter;
LUK 18:37 and, when people told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing,
LUK 18:38 he shouted out, ‘Jesus, Son of David, take pity on me!’
LUK 18:39 Those who were in front kept telling him to be quiet, but he continued to call out the louder, ‘Son of David, take pity on me!’
LUK 18:40 Then Jesus stopped and ordered the man to be brought to him. And, when he had come close up to him, Jesus asked him,
LUK 18:41 ‘What do you want me to do for you?’ ‘Master,’ he said, ‘I want to recover my sight.’
LUK 18:42 And Jesus said, ‘Recover your sight, your faith has delivered you.’
LUK 18:43 Instantly he recovered his sight, and began to follow Jesus, praising God. And all the people, on seeing it, gave glory to God.
LUK 19:1 Jesus entered Jericho and made his way through the town.
LUK 19:2 There was a man there, known by the name of Zacchaeus, who was a senior tax collector and a rich man.
LUK 19:3 He tried to see what Jesus was like; but, being short, he was unable to do so because of the crowd.
LUK 19:4 So he ran on ahead and climbed into a mulberry tree to see Jesus, for he knew that he must pass that way.
LUK 19:5 When Jesus came to the place, he looked up and said to him, ‘Zacchaeus, be quick and come down, for I must stop at your house today.’
LUK 19:6 So Zacchaeus got down quickly, and joyfully welcomed him.
LUK 19:7 On seeing this, everyone began to complain, ‘He has gone to stay with a man who is an outcast.’
LUK 19:8 But Zacchaeus stood forward and said to the Master, ‘Listen, Master! I will give half my property to the poor, and, if I have defrauded anyone of anything, I will give him back four times as much.’
LUK 19:9 ‘Salvation has come to this house today,’ answered Jesus, ‘for even this man is a son of Abraham.
LUK 19:10 The Son of Man has come to search for those who are lost and to save them.’
LUK 19:11 As the people were listening to this, Jesus went on to tell them a parable. He did so because he was near Jerusalem, and because they thought that the kingdom of God was going to be proclaimed at once.
LUK 19:12 He said, ‘A nobleman once went to a distant country to receive his appointment to a kingdom and then return.
LUK 19:13 He called ten of his servants and gave them ten pounds of silver each, and told them to trade with them during his absence.
LUK 19:14 But his subjects hated him and sent envoys after him to say “We will not have this man as our king.”
LUK 19:15 On his return, after having been appointed king, he directed that the servants to whom he had given his money should be summoned, so that he might learn what amount of trade they had done.
LUK 19:16 The first came up, and said “Sir, your ten pounds have made a hundred.”
LUK 19:17 “Well done, good servant!” exclaimed the master. “As you have proved trustworthy in a very small matter, I appoint you governor over ten towns.”
LUK 19:18 When the second came, he said “Your ten pounds, Sir, have produced fifty.”
LUK 19:19 So the master said to him “And you I appoint over five towns.”
LUK 19:20 Another servant also came and said “Sir, here are your ten pounds; I have kept them put away in a handkerchief.
LUK 19:21 For I was afraid of you, because you are a stern man. You take what you have not planted, and reap what you have not sown.”
LUK 19:22 The master answered “Out of your own mouth I judge you, you worthless servant. You knew that I am a stern man, that I take what I have not planted, and reap what I have not sown?
LUK 19:23 Then why didn’t you put my money into a bank? And I, on my return, could have claimed it with interest.
LUK 19:24 Take away from him the ten pounds,” he said to those standing by, “and give them to the one who has the hundred.”
LUK 19:25 “But, Sir,” they said, “he has a hundred pounds already!”
LUK 19:26 “I tell you,” he answered, “that, to him who has, more will be given, but, from him who has nothing, even what he has will be taken away.
LUK 19:27 But as for my enemies, these men who would not have me as their king, bring them here and put them to death in my presence.”’
LUK 19:28 After saying this, Jesus went on in front, going up to Jerusalem.
LUK 19:29 It was when Jesus had almost reached Bethphage and Bethany, near the Mount of Olives, that he sent on two of the disciples.
LUK 19:30 ‘Go to the village facing us,’ he said, ‘and, when you get there, you will find a foal tethered, which no one has yet ridden; untie it and lead it here.
LUK 19:31 And, if anybody asks you “Why are you untying it?”, you are to say this – “The Master wants it.”’
LUK 19:32 So the two who were sent went and found it as Jesus had told them.
LUK 19:33 While they were untying the foal, the owners asked them – ‘Why are you untying the foal?’
LUK 19:34 And the two disciples answered – ‘The Master wants it.’
LUK 19:35 Then they led it back to Jesus, and threw their cloaks on the foal and put Jesus on it.
LUK 19:36 As he went along, the people kept spreading their cloaks in the road.
LUK 19:37 When he had almost reached the place where the road led down the Mount of Olives, everyone of the many disciples began in their joy to praise God loudly for all the miracles that they had seen:
LUK 19:38 ‘Blessed is He who comes – our king – in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven, and glory on high.’
LUK 19:39 Some of the Pharisees in the crowd said to him, ‘Teacher, restrain your disciples.’
LUK 19:40 But Jesus answered, ‘I tell you that if they are silent, the stones will call out.’
LUK 19:41 When he drew near, on seeing the city, he wept over it, and said,
LUK 19:42 ‘If only you had known, while yet there was time – even you – the things that make for peace! But now they have been hidden from your sight.
LUK 19:43 For a time is coming when your enemies will surround you with earthworks, and encircle you, and hem you in on all sides;
LUK 19:44 they will trample you down and your children within you, and they will not leave in you one stone on another, because you did not know the time of your visitation.’
LUK 19:45 Jesus went into the Temple Courts and began to drive out those who were selling,
LUK 19:46 saying as he did so, ‘Scripture says – “My house will be a house of prayer”; but you have made it a den of robbers.’
LUK 19:47 Jesus continued to teach each day in the Temple Courts; but the chief priests and teachers of the Law were eager to take his life, and so also were the leaders of the people.
LUK 19:48 Yet they could not see what to do, for the people all hung on his words.
LUK 20:1 On one of these days, when Jesus was teaching the people in the Temple Courts and telling the good news, the chief priests and the teachers of the Law, joined by the elders, confronted him,
LUK 20:2 and addressing him, said, ‘Tell us what authority you have to do these things. Who is it who has given you this authority?’
LUK 20:3 ‘I, too,’ said Jesus in reply, ‘will ask you one question. Give me an answer to it.
LUK 20:4 It is about John’s baptism – was it of divine or of human origin?’
LUK 20:5 But they began arguing together, ‘If we say “divine,” he will say “Why didn’t you believe him?”
LUK 20:6 But, if we say “human,” the people will all stone us, for they are persuaded that John was a prophet.’
LUK 20:7 So they answered that they did not know its origin.
LUK 20:8 ‘Then I,’ said Jesus, ‘refuse to tell you what authority I have to do these things.’
LUK 20:9 But Jesus began to tell the people this parable – ‘A man once planted a vineyard, and then let it out to tenants, and went abroad for a long while.
LUK 20:10 At the proper time he sent a servant to the tenants, so that they could give him a share of the produce of the vineyard. The tenants, however, beat him and sent him away empty-handed.
LUK 20:11 The owner afterwards sent another servant; but the tenants beat and insulted this man too, and sent him away empty-handed.
LUK 20:12 He sent a third; but they wounded this man also, and threw him outside.
LUK 20:13 “What should I do?” said the owner of the vineyard. “I will send my son, who is very dear to me. Perhaps they will respect him.”
LUK 20:14 But, on seeing him, the tenants consulted with one another. “Here is the heir!” they said. “Let us kill him, and then the inheritance will become ours.”
LUK 20:15 So they threw him outside the vineyard and killed him. Now what will the owner of the vineyard do to them?
LUK 20:16 He will come and put those tenants to death, and will let the vineyard to others.’ ‘Heaven forbid!’ they exclaimed when they heard it.
LUK 20:17 But Jesus looked at them and said, ‘What then is the meaning of this passage? – “The stone which the builders despised has now itself become the cornerstone.”
LUK 20:18 Everyone who falls on that stone will be dashed to pieces, while anyone on whom it falls – it will scatter him as dust.’
LUK 20:19 After this the teachers of the Law and the chief priest were eager to lay hands on Jesus then and there, but they were afraid of the people; for they saw that it was at them that he had aimed this parable.
LUK 20:20 Having watched their opportunity, they afterwards sent some spies, who pretended to be good men, to catch Jesus in the course of conversation, and so enable them to give him up to the Governor’s jurisdiction and authority.
LUK 20:21 These spies asked Jesus a question. They said, ‘Teacher, we know that you are right in what you say and teach, and that you do not take any account of a person’s position, but teach the way of God honestly;
LUK 20:22 are we right in paying tribute to the Emperor or not?’
LUK 20:23 Seeing through their deceitfulness, Jesus said to them,
LUK 20:24 ‘Show me a coin. Whose head and title are on it?’
LUK 20:25 ‘The Emperor’s,’ they said; and Jesus replied, ‘Well then, pay to the Emperor what belongs to the Emperor, and to God what belongs to God.’
LUK 20:26 They could not object to this answer before the people; and, in their wonder at his reply, they held their tongues.
LUK 20:27 Presently there came up some Sadducees, who maintain that there is no resurrection. Their question was this –
LUK 20:28 ‘Teacher, Moses laid down for us in his writings that – “Should a man’s married brother die, and should he be childless, the man should take the widow as his wife, and raise up a family for his brother.”
LUK 20:29 Well, there were once seven brothers; of whom the eldest, after taking a wife, died childless.
LUK 20:30 The second and third brothers both took her as their wife;
LUK 20:31 and so, too, did all seven – dying without children.
LUK 20:32 The woman herself was the last to die.
LUK 20:33 About the woman, then – at the resurrection, whose wife is she to be, all seven brothers having had her as their wife?’
LUK 20:34 ‘The men and women of this world,’ said Jesus, ‘marry and are given in marriage;
LUK 20:35 but, for those who are thought worthy to attain to that other world and the resurrection from the dead, there is no marrying or being married,
LUK 20:36 nor indeed can they die again, for they are like angels and, having shared in the resurrection, they are God’s children.
LUK 20:37 As to the fact that the dead rise, even Moses indicated that, in the passage about the Bush, when he calls the Lord – “The God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.”
LUK 20:38 Now he is not God of dead people, but of living. For in his sight all are alive.’
LUK 20:39 ‘Well said, teacher!’ exclaimed some of the teachers of the Law,
LUK 20:40 for they did not venture to question him any further.
LUK 20:41 But Jesus said to them, ‘How is it that people say that the Christ is to be David’s son?
LUK 20:42 For David, in the book of Psalms, says himself – “The Lord said to my lord: Sit at my right hand,
LUK 20:43 until I put your enemies as a stool for your feet.”
LUK 20:44 David, then, calls him “lord,” so how is he David’s son?’
LUK 20:45 While all the people were listening, Jesus said to the disciples,
LUK 20:46 ‘Be on your guard against the teachers of the Law, who delight to walk about in long robes, and like to be greeted in the streets with respect, and to have the best seats in the synagogues, and places of honour at dinner.
LUK 20:47 These are the men who rob widows of their houses, and make a pretence of saying long prayers. Their sentence will be all the heavier.’
LUK 21:1 Looking up, Jesus saw the rich people putting their gifts into the chests for the Temple offerings.
LUK 21:2 He saw, too, a widow in poor circumstances putting two small coins into them.
LUK 21:3 ‘I tell you’, he said ‘that this poor widow has put in more than all the others;
LUK 21:4 for everyone else here put in something from what he had to spare, while she, in her need, has put in all she had to live on.’
LUK 21:5 When some of them spoke about the Temple being decorated with beautiful stones and offerings, Jesus said,
LUK 21:6 ‘As for these things that you are looking at, a time is coming when not one stone will be left on another here. Every one will be thrown down.’
LUK 21:7 So the disciples questioned Jesus, ‘But, teacher, when will this happen? And what sign will there be when this is near?’
LUK 21:8 And Jesus said, ‘See that you are not led astray; for many will take my name, and come saying “I am He,” and “The time is close at hand.” Do not follow them.
LUK 21:9 And, when you hear of wars and disturbances, do not be terrified, for these things must occur first; but the end will not be at once.’
LUK 21:10 Then he said to them, ‘Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom,
LUK 21:11 and there will be great earthquakes, and plagues and famines in various places, and there will be terrible appearances and signs in the heavens.
LUK 21:12 Before all this, they will lay hands on you and persecute you, and they will betray you to synagogues and put you in prison, when you will be brought before kings and governors for the sake of my name.
LUK 21:13 Then will be your opportunity of witnessing for me.
LUK 21:14 Make up your minds, therefore, not to prepare your defence;
LUK 21:15 for I will myself give you words, and a wisdom which all your opponents together will be unable to resist or defy.
LUK 21:16 You will be betrayed even by your parents and brothers and sisters and relatives and friends, and they will cause some of you to be put to death,
LUK 21:17 and you will be hated by everyone because of me my name.
LUK 21:18 Yet not a single hair of your heads will be lost!
LUK 21:19 By your endurance you will win yourselves life.
LUK 21:20 As soon, however, as you see Jerusalem surrounded by armed camps, then you may know that the hour of her desecration is at hand.
LUK 21:21 Then those of you who are in Judea must take refuge in the mountains, those who are in Jerusalem must leave at once, and those who are in the country places must not go into it.
LUK 21:22 For these are to be the days of vengeance, when all that scripture says will be fulfilled.
LUK 21:23 Alas for pregnant women, and for those who are nursing infants in those days! For there will be great suffering in the land, and anger against this people.
LUK 21:24 They will fall by the edge of the sword, and will be taken prisoners to every land, and Jerusalem will be under the heel of the Gentiles, until their day is over – as it will be.
LUK 21:25 There will be signs, too, in the sun and moon and stars, and on the earth despair among the nations, in their dismay at the roar of the sea and the surge.
LUK 21:26 People’s hearts will fail them through dread of what is coming upon the world; for the forces of the heavens will be convulsed.
LUK 21:27 Then will be seen the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
LUK 21:28 And, when these things begin to occur, look upwards and lift your heads, for your deliverance will be at hand.’
LUK 21:29 Then he taught them a lesson, saying – ‘Look at the fig tree and all the other trees.
LUK 21:30 As soon as they shoot, you know, as you look at them, without being told, that summer is near.
LUK 21:31 And so may you, as soon as you see these things happening, know that the kingdom of God is near.
LUK 21:32 I tell you that even the present generation will not pass away until all has taken place.
LUK 21:33 The heavens and the earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
LUK 21:34 Be on your guard or your minds will become dulled by debauches or drunkenness or the anxieties of life, and “that day” will close on you suddenly like a trap.
LUK 21:35 For it will come on all who are living upon the face of the whole earth.
LUK 21:36 Be on the watch at all times, and pray that you may have strength to escape all that is destined to happen, and to stand in the presence of the Son of Man.’
LUK 21:37 During the days, Jesus continued to teach in the Temple Courts, but he went out and spent the nights on the hill called the “Mount of Olives.”
LUK 21:38 And all the people would get up early in the morning and come to listen to him in the Temple Courts.
LUK 22:1 The feast of the unleavened bread, known as the Passover, was near.
LUK 22:2 The chief priest and the teachers of the Law were looking for an opportunity of destroying Jesus, for they were afraid of the people.
LUK 22:3 Now Satan took possession of Judas, who was known as Iscariot, and who belonged to the Twelve;
LUK 22:4 and he went and discussed with the chief priests and officers in charge at the Temple the best way of betraying Jesus to them.
LUK 22:5 They were glad of this, and agreed to pay him.
LUK 22:6 So Judas assented, and looked for an opportunity to betray Jesus to them, in the absence of a crowd.
LUK 22:7 When the day of the Festival of the unleavened bread came, on which the Passover lambs had to be killed,
LUK 22:8 Jesus sent forward Peter and John, saying to them, ‘Go and make preparations for our eating the Passover.’
LUK 22:9 ‘Where do you wish us to make preparations?’ they asked.
LUK 22:10 ‘Listen,’ he answered, ‘when you have reached the city, a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you; follow him into whatever house he enters;
LUK 22:11 and you will say to the owner of the house “The teacher says to you – Where is the room where I am to eat the Passover with my disciples?”
LUK 22:12 The man will show you a large upstairs room, set out; there make preparations.’
LUK 22:13 So Peter and John went on, and found everything just as Jesus had told them, and they prepared the Passover.
LUK 22:14 When the time came, Jesus took his place at the table, and the apostles with him.
LUK 22:15 ‘I have most earnestly wished,’ he said, ‘to eat this Passover with you before I suffer.
LUK 22:16 For I tell you that I will not eat it again, until it has had its fulfilment in the kingdom of God.’
LUK 22:17 Then, on receiving a cup, after saying the thanksgiving, he said, ‘Take this and share it among you.
LUK 22:18 For I tell you that I will not, after today, drink of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God has come.’
LUK 22:19 Then Jesus took some bread, and, after saying the thanksgiving, broke it and gave to them, with the words, ‘This is my body.
LUK 22:20 
LUK 22:21 Yet see! The hand of the man who is betraying me is beside me on the table!
LUK 22:22 True, the Son of Man is passing, by the way ordained for him, yet alas for that man by whom he is being betrayed!’
LUK 22:23 Then they began questioning one another which of them it could be who was going to do this.
LUK 22:24 And a dispute arose among them as to which of them was to be regarded as the greatest.
LUK 22:25 Jesus, however, said, ‘The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their oppressors are styled “Benefactors.”
LUK 22:26 But with you it must not be so. No, let the greatest among you become like the youngest, and him who leads like him who serves.
LUK 22:27 Which is the greater – the master at the table or his servant? Is not it the master at the table? Yet I myself am among you as one who serves.
LUK 22:28 You are the men who have stood by me in my trials;
LUK 22:29 and, just as my Father has assigned me a kingdom, I assign you places,
LUK 22:30 so that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and be seated on twelve thrones as judges of the twelve tribes of Israel.
LUK 22:31 Simon! Simon! listen. Satan demanded leave to sift you all like wheat,
LUK 22:32 but I prayed for you, Simon, that your faith should not fail. And you, when you have returned to me, are to strengthen the others.’
LUK 22:33 ‘Master,’ said Peter, ‘with you I am ready to go both to prison and to death.’
LUK 22:34 ‘I tell you, Peter,’ replied Jesus, ‘the cock will not crow today until you have disowned all knowledge of me three times.’
LUK 22:35 Then he said to them all, ‘When I sent you out as my messengers, without either purse, or bag, or sandals, were you in need of anything?’ ‘No; nothing,’ they answered.
LUK 22:36 ‘Now, however,’ he said, ‘he who has a purse must take it and his bag as well; and he who has not must sell his cloak and buy a sword.
LUK 22:37 For, I tell you, that passage of scripture must be fulfilled in me, which says – “He was counted among the godless”; indeed all that refers to me is finding its fulfilment.’
LUK 22:38 ‘Master,’ they exclaimed, ‘look, here are two swords!’ ‘Enough!’ said Jesus.
LUK 22:39 Jesus then went out, and made his way as usual to the Mount of Olives, followed by his disciples.
LUK 22:40 And, when he reached the spot, he said to them, ‘Pray that you may not fall into temptation.’
LUK 22:41 Then he withdrew about a stone’s throw, and knelt down and began to pray.
LUK 22:42 ‘Father,’ he said, ‘if it is your pleasure, spare me this cup; only, not my will but yours be done.’
LUK 22:43 Presently there appeared to him an angel from heaven, who strengthened him.
LUK 22:44 And, as his anguish became intense, he prayed still more earnestly, while his sweat was like great drops of blood falling on the ground.
LUK 22:45 Then he rose from praying, and came to the disciples and found them sleeping for sorrow.
LUK 22:46 ‘Why are you asleep?’ he asked them. ‘Rise and pray so that you don’t fall into temptation.’
LUK 22:47 While he was still speaking, a crowd appeared in sight, led by the man called Judas, who was one of the Twelve. Judas approached Jesus, to kiss him;
LUK 22:48 at which Jesus said to him, ‘Judas, is it by a kiss that you betray the Son of Man?’
LUK 22:49 But when those who were round Jesus saw what was going to happen, they exclaimed, ‘Master, should we use our swords?’
LUK 22:50 And one of them struck the high priest’s servant and cut off his right ear;
LUK 22:51 at which Jesus said, ‘Let me at least do this’; and, touching his ear, he healed the wound.
LUK 22:52 Then, turning to the chief priests and officers in charge at the Temple and the elders, who had come for him, he said, ‘Have you come out, as if after a robber, with swords and clubs?
LUK 22:53 When I was with you day after day in the Temple Courts, you did not lay hands on me; but now your time has come, and the power of darkness.’
LUK 22:54 Those who had taken Jesus prisoner took him away into the house of the high priest. Peter followed at a distance.
LUK 22:55 But, when they had lit a fire in the centre of the courtyard and had all sat down there, Peter seated himself in the middle of them.
LUK 22:56 Presently a maidservant saw him sitting near the blaze of the fire. She looked carefully at him and said, ‘Why, this man was one of his companions!’
LUK 22:57 But Peter denied it. ‘I do not know him,’ he replied.
LUK 22:58 A little while afterwards someone else – a man – saw him and said, ‘Why, you are one of them!’ ‘No,’ Peter said, ‘I am not.’
LUK 22:59 About an hour later another man declared positively, ‘This man also was certainly with him. Why, he is a Galilean!’
LUK 22:60 But Peter said, ‘I do not know what you are speaking about.’ Instantly, while he was still speaking, a cock crowed.
LUK 22:61 And the Master turned and looked at Peter; and Peter remembered the words that the Master had said to him – ‘Before a cock has crowed today, you will disown me three times’;
LUK 22:62 and he went outside and wept bitterly.
LUK 22:63 The men who held Jesus kept making sport of him and beating him.
LUK 22:64 They blindfolded him and then questioned him. ‘Now play the prophet,’ they said. ‘Who was it that struck you?’
LUK 22:65 And they heaped many other insults on him.
LUK 22:66 At daybreak the assembly of the elders of the people met – both the chief priests and the teachers of the Law – and took Jesus before their High Council.
LUK 22:67 ‘If you are the Christ,’ they said, ‘tell us so.’ ‘If I tell you,’ replied Jesus, ‘you will not believe me;
LUK 22:68 and, if I question you, you will not answer.
LUK 22:69 But from this hour the Son of Man will be seated on the right hand of God Almighty.’
LUK 22:70 ‘Are you, then, the Son of God?’ they all asked. ‘It is true,’ answered Jesus, ‘I am.’
LUK 22:71 At this they exclaimed, ‘Why do we want any more evidence? We have heard it ourselves from his own lips!’
LUK 23:1 Then they all rose in a body and led Jesus before Pilate.
LUK 23:2 And they began to accuse him, ‘This is a man whom we found misleading our people, preventing them from paying taxes to the Emperor, and giving out that he himself is “Christ, a king.”’
LUK 23:3 ‘Are you the king of the Jews?’ Pilate asked him. ‘It is true,’ replied Jesus.
LUK 23:4 But Pilate, turning to the chief priests and the people, said, ‘I do not see anything to find fault with in this man.’
LUK 23:5 But they insisted, ‘He is stirring up the people by his teaching all through Judea; he began with Galilee and has now come here.’
LUK 23:6 Hearing this, Pilate asked if the man was a Galilean;
LUK 23:7 and, having satisfied himself that Jesus came under Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who also was at Jerusalem at the time.
LUK 23:8 When Herod saw Jesus, he was exceedingly pleased, for he had been wanting to see him for a long time, having heard a great deal about him; and he was hoping to see some sign given by him.
LUK 23:9 So he questioned him at some length, but Jesus made no reply.
LUK 23:10 Meanwhile the chief priests and the teachers of the Law stood by and vehemently accused him.
LUK 23:11 And Herod, with his soldiers, treated Jesus with scorn; he mocked him by throwing a gorgeous robe round him, and then sent him back to Pilate.
LUK 23:12 And Herod and Pilate became friends that very day, for before that there had been ill-will between them.
LUK 23:13 So Pilate summoned the chief priests, and the leading men, and the people,
LUK 23:14 and said to them, ‘You brought this man before me charged with misleading the people; and yet, for my part, though I examined him before you, I did not find this man to blame for any of the things of which you accuse him;
LUK 23:15 nor did Herod either; for he has sent him back to us. And, as a fact, he has not done anything deserving death;
LUK 23:16 so I will have him scourged, and then release him.’
LUK 23:17 
LUK 23:18 But they began to shout as one man, ‘Kill this fellow, but release Barabbas for us.’
LUK 23:19 (Barabbas was a man who had been put in prison for a riot that had broken out in the city and for murder.)
LUK 23:20 Pilate, however, wanting to release Jesus, called to them again;
LUK 23:21 but they kept calling out, ‘Crucify, crucify him!’
LUK 23:22 ‘Why, what harm has this man done?’ Pilate said to them for the third time. ‘I have found nothing in him for which he could be condemned to death. So I will have him scourged, and then release him.’
LUK 23:23 But they persisted in loudly demanding his crucifixion; and their clamour gained the day.
LUK 23:24 Pilate decided that their demand should be granted.
LUK 23:25 He released the man who had been put in prison for riot and murder, as they demanded, and gave Jesus up to be dealt with as they pleased.
LUK 23:26 And, as they were leading Jesus away, they laid hold of Simon from Cyrene, who was on his way in from the country, and they put the cross on his shoulders, for him to carry it behind Jesus.
LUK 23:27 There was a great crowd of people following him, many being women who were beating their breasts and wailing for him.
LUK 23:28 So Jesus turned and said to them, ‘Women of Jerusalem, do not weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children.
LUK 23:29 A time, I tell you, is coming, when it will be said – “Happy are the women who are barren, and those who have never borne children or nursed them!”
LUK 23:30 At that time people will begin to say to the mountains “Fall on us,” and to the hills “Cover us.”
LUK 23:31 If what you see is done while the tree is green, what will happen when it is dry?’
LUK 23:32 There were two others also, criminals, led out to be executed with Jesus.
LUK 23:33 When they had reached the place called “The Skull,” there they crucified Jesus and the criminals, one on the right, and one on the left.
LUK 23:34 Then Jesus said, ‘Father, forgive them; they do not know what they are doing.’ His clothes they divided among them by casting lots.
LUK 23:35 Meanwhile the people stood looking on. Even the leading men said with a sneer, ‘He saved others, let him save himself, if he is God’s Christ, his chosen one.’
LUK 23:36 The soldiers, too, came up in mockery, bringing him common wine,
LUK 23:37 and saying as they did so, ‘If you are the king of the Jews, save yourself.’
LUK 23:38 Above him were the words – “THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.”
LUK 23:39 One of the criminals who were hanging beside Jesus railed at him. ‘Aren’t you the Christ? Save yourself and us,’ he said.
LUK 23:40 But the other rebuked him. ‘Haven’t you,’ he said, ‘any fear of God, now that you are under the same sentence?
LUK 23:41 And we justly so, for we are only reaping our deserts, but this man has not done anything wrong.
LUK 23:42 Jesus,’ he went on, ‘do not forget me when you have come to your kingdom.’
LUK 23:43 And Jesus answered, ‘I tell you, this very day you will be with me in Paradise.’
LUK 23:44 It was nearly midday, when a darkness came over the whole country, lasting until three in the afternoon,
LUK 23:45 the sun being eclipsed; and the Temple curtain was torn down the middle.
LUK 23:46 Then Jesus, with a loud cry, said, ‘Father, into your hands I commit my spirit.’ And with these words he expired.
LUK 23:47 The Roman centurion, on seeing what had happened, praised God, exclaiming, ‘This must have been a good man!’
LUK 23:48 All the people who had collected to see the sight watched what occurred, and then went home beating their breasts.
LUK 23:49 All the friends of Jesus had been standing at a distance, with the women who accompanied him from Galilee, watching all this.
LUK 23:50 Now there was a man of the name of Joseph, who was a member of the Council, and who bore a good and upright character.
LUK 23:51 (This man had not assented to the decision and action of the Council.) He belonged to Arimathea, a town in Judea, and lived in expectation of the kingdom of God.
LUK 23:52 He now went to see Pilate, and asked for the body of Jesus;
LUK 23:53 and, when he had taken it down, he wrapped it in a linen sheet, and laid him in a tomb cut out of stone, in which no one had yet been buried.
LUK 23:54 It was the Preparation day, and just before the Sabbath began.
LUK 23:55 The women who had accompanied Jesus from Galilee followed, and saw the tomb and how the body of Jesus was laid,
LUK 23:56 and then went home, and prepared spices and perfumes. During the Sabbath they rested, as directed by the commandment.
LUK 24:1 But very early on the first day of the week they went to the tomb, taking with them the spices that they had prepared.
LUK 24:2 They found that the stone had been rolled away from the tomb;
LUK 24:3 and, on going into it, they could not find the body.
LUK 24:4 While they were at a loss to account for this, all at once two men stood beside them, in dazzling clothing.
LUK 24:5 But, when in their fear the women bowed their faces to the ground, the men said to them, ‘Why are you looking among the dead for him who is living?
LUK 24:6 Remember how he spoke to you before he left Galilee –
LUK 24:7 How he said that the Son of Man must be betrayed into the hands of wicked men, and be crucified, and rise again on the third day.’
LUK 24:8 Then they remembered the words of Jesus,
LUK 24:9 and, on returning from the tomb, they told all this to the Eleven and to all the rest.
LUK 24:10 There were Mary of Magdala, and Joanna, and Mary, the mother of James. The other women, too, spoke about this to the apostles.
LUK 24:11 What they said seemed to the apostles mere nonsense, and they did not believe them.
LUK 24:12 
LUK 24:13 It happened that very day that two of the disciples were going to a village called Emmaus, which was about seven miles from Jerusalem,
LUK 24:14 talking together, as they went, about all that had just taken place.
LUK 24:15 While they were talking about these things and discussing them, Jesus himself came up and went on their way with them;
LUK 24:16 but their eyes were blinded so that they could not recognise him.
LUK 24:17 ‘What is this that you are saying to each other as you walk along?’ Jesus asked. They stopped, with sad looks on their faces,
LUK 24:18 and then one of them, whose name was Cleopas, said to Jesus, ‘Are you staying by yourself at Jerusalem, that you have not heard of the things that have happened there within the last few days?’
LUK 24:19 ‘What things do you mean?’ asked Jesus. ‘Why, about Jesus of Nazareth,’ they answered, ‘who, in the eyes of God and all the people, was a prophet, whose power was felt in both his words and actions;
LUK 24:20 and how the chief priests and our leading men gave him up to be sentenced to death, and afterwards crucified him.
LUK 24:21 But we were hoping that he was the Destined Deliverer of Israel; yes, and besides all this, it is now three days since these things occurred.
LUK 24:22 And what is more, some of the women among us have greatly astonished us. They went to the tomb at daybreak
LUK 24:23 And, not finding the body of Jesus there, came and told us that they had seen a vision of angels who told them that he was alive.
LUK 24:24 So some of our number went to the tomb and found everything just as the women had said, but they did not see Jesus.’
LUK 24:25 Then Jesus said to them, ‘Foolish men, slow to accept all that the prophets have said!
LUK 24:26 Was not the Christ bound to undergo this suffering before entering into his glory?’
LUK 24:27 Then, beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he explained to them all through the scriptures the passages that referred to himself.
LUK 24:28 When they got near the village to which they were walking, Jesus appeared to be going further;
LUK 24:29 but they pressed him not to do so. ‘Stay with us,’ they said, ‘for it is getting towards evening, and the sun is already low.’ So Jesus went in to stay with them.
LUK 24:30 After he had taken his place at the table with them, he took the bread and said the blessing, and broke it, and gave it to them.
LUK 24:31 Then their eyes were opened and they recognised him; but he disappeared from their sight.
LUK 24:32 ‘How our hearts glowed,’ the disciples said to each other, ‘while he was talking to us on the road, and when he explained the scriptures to us!’
LUK 24:33 Then they immediately got up and returned to Jerusalem, where they found the Eleven and their companions all together,
LUK 24:34 who told them that the Master had really risen, and had appeared to Simon.
LUK 24:35 So they also related what had happened during their walk, and how they had recognised Jesus at the breaking of the bread.
LUK 24:36 While they were still talking about these things, Jesus himself stood among them.
LUK 24:37 In their terror and alarm they thought they saw a ghost,
LUK 24:38 but Jesus said to them, ‘Why are you so startled? And why do doubts arise in your minds?
LUK 24:39 Look at my hands and my feet, and you will know that it is I. Feel me, and look at me, for a ghost has not flesh and bones, as you see that I have.’
LUK 24:40 
LUK 24:41 While they were still unable to believe it all, overcome with joy, and were wondering if it were true, Jesus said to them, ‘Have you anything here to eat?’
LUK 24:42 They handed him a piece of broiled fish,
LUK 24:43 and he took it and ate it before their eyes.
LUK 24:44 ‘This is what I told you,’ he said, ‘when I was still with you – that everything that had been written about me in the Law of Moses, the prophets, and the Psalms, must be fulfilled.’
LUK 24:45 Then he enabled them to understand the meaning of the scriptures, saying to them,
LUK 24:46 ‘Scripture says that the Christ will suffer, and that he will rise again from the dead on the third day,
LUK 24:47 and that repentance for forgiveness of sins will be proclaimed on his authority to all the nations – beginning at Jerusalem.
LUK 24:48 You yourselves are to be witnesses to all this.
LUK 24:49 And now I am myself about to send you that which my Father has promised. But you must remain in the city until you have been invested with power from above.’
LUK 24:50 After this, Jesus led them out as far as Bethany, and there raised his hands and blessed them.
LUK 24:51 As he was in the act of blessing them, he left them.
LUK 24:52 They returned to Jerusalem full of joy;
LUK 24:53 and they were constantly in the Temple Courts, blessing God.
JOH 1:1 In the beginning the Word was; and the Word was with God; and the Word was God.
JOH 1:2 He was in the beginning with God;
JOH 1:3 through him all things came into being, and nothing came into being apart from him.
JOH 1:4 That which came into being in him was life; and the life was the light of humanity;
JOH 1:5 and the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness never overpowered it.
JOH 1:6 There appeared a man sent from God, whose name was John;
JOH 1:7 he came as a witness – to bear witness to the light so that through him everyone might believe.
JOH 1:8 He was not the light, but he came to bear witness to the light.
JOH 1:9 That was the true light which enlightens everyone coming into the world.
JOH 1:10 He was in the world; and through him the world came into being – yet the world did not know him.
JOH 1:11 He came to his own – yet his own did not receive him.
JOH 1:12 But to all who did receive him he gave power to become children of God – to those who believe in his name.
JOH 1:13 For not to natural conception, nor to human instincts, nor to human will did they owe the new life, but to God.
JOH 1:14 And the Word became human, and lived among us, (We saw his glory – the glory of the Only Son sent from the Father), full of love and truth.
JOH 1:15 (John bears witness to him; he cried aloud – for it was he who spoke – ‘He who is coming after me is now before me, for he was ever first’);
JOH 1:16 out of his fullness we have all received gift after gift of love;
JOH 1:17 for the Law was given through Moses, love and truth came through Jesus Christ.
JOH 1:18 No one has ever yet seen God; God the only Son, who is ever with the Father – he has revealed him.
JOH 1:19 When the religious authorities in Jerusalem sent some Priests and Levites to ask John – ‘Who are you?’,
JOH 1:20 he told them clearly and simply, ‘I am not the Christ.’
JOH 1:21 ‘What then?’ they asked. ‘Are you Elijah?’ ‘No,’ he said, ‘I am not.’ ‘Are you “the prophet”?’ He answered, ‘No.’
JOH 1:22 ‘Who then are you?’ they continued. ‘Tell us so that we have an answer to give to those who have sent us. What do you say about yourself?’
JOH 1:23 ‘I,’ he answered, ‘am – “The voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness: make a straight road for the Lord”, as the prophet Isaiah said.’
JOH 1:24 These men had been sent from the Pharisees;
JOH 1:25 and their next question was, ‘Why then do you baptise, if you are not the Christ or Elijah or “the prophet”?’
JOH 1:26 John’s answer was – ‘I baptise with water, but among you stands one whom you do not know;
JOH 1:27 he is coming after me, yet I am not worthy even to unfasten his sandal.’
JOH 1:28 This happened at Bethany, across the Jordan, where John was baptising.
JOH 1:29 The next day John saw Jesus coming towards him, and exclaimed, ‘Here is the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!
JOH 1:30 I was talking about him when I said “After me there is coming a man who ranks ahead of me, because before I was born he already was.”
JOH 1:31 I did not know who he was, but I have come baptising with water to make him known to Israel.’
JOH 1:32 John also said: ‘I saw the Spirit come down from heaven like a dove and rest on him.
JOH 1:33 I myself did not know him, but he who sent me to baptise with water, he said to me “He on whom you see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him – he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit.”
JOH 1:34 This I have seen myself, and I have declared my belief that he is the Son of God.’
JOH 1:35 The next day, when John was standing with two of his disciples,
JOH 1:36 he looked at Jesus as he passed and exclaimed, ‘There is the Lamb of God!’
JOH 1:37 The two disciples heard him say this, and followed Jesus.
JOH 1:38 But Jesus turned round, and saw them following. ‘What are you looking for?’ he asked. ‘Rabbi,’ they answered (or, as we should say, “Teacher”), ‘where are you staying?’
JOH 1:39 ‘Come, and you will see,’ he replied. So they went, and saw where he was staying, and spent that day with him. It was then about four in the afternoon.
JOH 1:40 One of the two, who heard what John said and followed Jesus, was Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother.
JOH 1:41 He first found his own brother Simon, and said to him, ‘We have found the Messiah!’ (a word which means “Christ,” or “Consecrated”.)
JOH 1:42 Then he brought him to Jesus. Looking straight at him, Jesus said, ‘You are Simon, the son of John; you will be called Cephas’ (which means “Peter,” or “Rock”).
JOH 1:43 The following day Jesus decided to leave for Galilee. He found Philip, and said to him, ‘Follow me.’
JOH 1:44 Philip was from Bethsaida, the same town as Andrew and Peter.
JOH 1:45 He found Nathanael and said to him, ‘We have found him of whom Moses wrote in the Law, and of whom the prophets also wrote – Jesus of Nazareth, Joseph’s son!’
JOH 1:46 ‘Can anything good come out of Nazareth?’ asked Nathanael. ‘Come and see,’ replied Philip.
JOH 1:47 When Jesus saw Nathanael coming towards him, he said, ‘Here is a true Israelite, in whom there is no deceit!’
JOH 1:48 ‘How do you know me?’ asked Nathanael. ‘Even before Philip called you,’ replied Jesus, ‘when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.’
JOH 1:49 ‘Rabbi,’ Nathanael exclaimed, ‘you are the Son of God, you are king of Israel!’
JOH 1:50 ‘Do you believe in me,’ asked Jesus, ‘because I told you that I saw you under the fig tree? You will see greater things than those!
JOH 1:51 In truth I tell you,’ he added, ‘you will all see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.’
JOH 2:1 Two days after this there was a wedding at Cana in Galilee, and Jesus’ mother was there.
JOH 2:2 Jesus himself, too, with his disciples, was invited to the wedding.
JOH 2:3 And, when the wine ran short, his mother said to him, ‘They have no wine left.’
JOH 2:4 ‘What do you want with me?’ answered Jesus. ‘My time has not come yet.’
JOH 2:5 His mother said to the servants, ‘Do whatever he tells you.’
JOH 2:6 There were standing there six stone water-jars, in accordance with the Jewish rule of purification, each holding twenty or thirty gallons.
JOH 2:7 Jesus said to the servants, ‘Fill the water-jars with water.’
JOH 2:8 And, when they had filled them to the brim, he added, ‘Now take some out, and carry it to the Master of the feast.’ The servants did so.
JOH 2:9 And, when the Master of the feast had tasted the water which had now become wine, not knowing where it had come from – although the servants who had taken out the water knew –
JOH 2:10 He called the groom and said to him, ‘Everyone puts good wine on the table first, and inferior wine afterwards, when his guests have drunk freely; but you have kept back the good wine until now!’
JOH 2:11 This, the first sign of his mission, Jesus gave at Cana in Galilee, and by it revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in him.
JOH 2:12 After this, Jesus went down to Capernaum – he, his mother, his brothers, and his disciples; but they stayed there only a few days.
JOH 2:13 Then, as the Jewish Passover was near, Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
JOH 2:14 In the Temple Courts he found people who were selling bullocks, sheep, and pigeons, and the money changers at their counters.
JOH 2:15 So he made a whip of cords, and drove them all out of the Temple Courts, and the sheep and bullocks as well; he scattered the money of the money changers, and overturned their tables,
JOH 2:16 and said to the pigeon-dealers, ‘Take these things away. Do not turn my Father’s house into a market house.’
JOH 2:17 His disciples remembered that scripture said – “Passion for your house will consume me.”
JOH 2:18 Then some of the religious authorities asked Jesus, ‘What sign are you going to show us, since you act in this way?’
JOH 2:19 ‘Destroy this temple,’ was his answer, ‘and I will raise it in three days.’
JOH 2:20 ‘This Temple,’ the authorities replied, ‘has been forty-six years in building, and are you going to “raise it in three days”?’
JOH 2:21 But Jesus was speaking of his body as a temple.
JOH 2:22 Afterwards, when he had risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this; and they believed the passage of scripture, and the words which Jesus had spoken.
JOH 2:23 While Jesus was in Jerusalem, during the Passover Festival, many came to trust in him, when they saw the signs of his mission that he was giving.
JOH 2:24 But Jesus did not put himself in their power because he knew what was in their hearts.
JOH 2:25 He did not need anyone to tell him about people because he could read what was in them.
JOH 3:1 Now there was a Pharisee named Nicodemus, who was a leading man among his people.
JOH 3:2 This man came to Jesus by night, and said to him, ‘Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God; for no one could give such signs as you are giving, unless God were with him.’
JOH 3:3 ‘In truth I tell you,’ exclaimed Jesus, ‘unless a person is reborn, they cannot see the kingdom of God.’
JOH 3:4 ‘How can a person,’ asked Nicodemus, ‘be born when they are old? Can they be born a second time?’
JOH 3:5 ‘In truth I tell you,’ answered Jesus, ‘unless a person owes their birth to water and Spirit, they cannot enter the kingdom of God.
JOH 3:6 All that owes its birth to human nature is human, and all that owes its birth to the Spirit is spiritual.
JOH 3:7 Do not wonder at my telling you that you all need to be reborn.
JOH 3:8 The wind blows wherever it wants, and you can hear the sound it makes, but you do not know where it comes from, or where it goes; it is the same with everyone who owes his birth to the Spirit.’
JOH 3:9 ‘How can that be?’ asked Nicodemus.
JOH 3:10 ‘What! You a teacher of Israel,’ exclaimed Jesus, ‘and yet do not understand this!
JOH 3:11 In truth I tell you that we speak of what we know, and state what we have seen; and yet you do not accept our statements.
JOH 3:12 If, when I tell you earthly things, you do not believe me, how will you believe me when I tell you of heavenly things?
JOH 3:13 No one has ascended to heaven, except him who descended from heaven – the Son of Man himself.
JOH 3:14 And, as Moses lifted up the snake in the desert, so must the Son of Man be lifted up;
JOH 3:15 so that everyone who believes in him may have eternal life.’
JOH 3:16 For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, so that everyone who believes in him may not be lost, but have eternal life.
JOH 3:17 For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but so that the world might be saved through him.
JOH 3:18 The person who believes in him escapes condemnation, while the person who does not believe in him is already condemned, because they have not believed in the only Son of God.
JOH 3:19 The ground of their condemnation is this, that though the light has come into the world, people preferred the darkness to the light, because their actions were wicked.
JOH 3:20 For the person who lives an evil life hates the light, and will not come to it, fearing that their actions will be exposed;
JOH 3:21 but the person who lives by the truth comes into the light, so it can be clearly seen that God is in all they do.
JOH 3:22 After this, Jesus went with his disciples into the country parts of Judea; and there he stayed with them, and baptised.
JOH 3:23 John, also, was baptising at Aenon near Salim, because there were many streams there; and people were constantly coming and being baptised.
JOH 3:24 (For John had not yet been imprisoned).
JOH 3:25 Now a discussion arose between some of John’s disciples and a fellow Jew on the subject of purification;
JOH 3:26 and the disciples came to John and said, ‘Rabbi, the man who was with you on the other side of the Jordan, and to whom you have yourself borne testimony – he, also, is baptising, and everybody is going to him.’
JOH 3:27 John’s answer was – ‘A person can gain nothing but what is given them from heaven.
JOH 3:28 You are yourselves witnesses that I said “I am not the Christ,” but “I have been sent before him as a messenger.”
JOH 3:29 It is the groom who has the bride; but the groom’s friend, who stands by and listens to him, is filled with joy when he hears the groom’s voice. This joy I have felt to the full.
JOH 3:30 He must become greater, and I less.’
JOH 3:31 He who comes from above is above all others; but a child of earth is earthly, and his teaching is earthly, too. He who comes from heaven is above all others.
JOH 3:32 He states what he has seen and what he heard, and yet no one accepts his statement.
JOH 3:33 They who did accept his statement confirm the fact that God is true.
JOH 3:34 For he whom God sent as his messenger gives us God’s own teaching, for God does not limit the gift of the Spirit.
JOH 3:35 The Father loves his Son, and has put everything in his hands.
JOH 3:36 The person who believes in the Son has eternal life, while a person who rejects the Son will not even see that life, but remains under God’s displeasure.
JOH 4:1 Now, when the Master heard that the Pharisees had been told that he was making and baptising more disciples than John
JOH 4:2 (Though it was not Jesus himself, but his disciples, who baptised),
JOH 4:3 he left Judea, and set out again for Galilee.
JOH 4:4 He had to pass through Samaria,
JOH 4:5 and, on his way, he came to a Samaritan town called Shechem, near the plot of land that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.
JOH 4:6 Jacob’s Spring was there, and Jesus, being tired after his journey, sat down beside the spring, just as he was. It was then about midday.
JOH 4:7 A woman of Samaria came to draw water; and Jesus said to her – ‘Give me some to drink,’
JOH 4:8 For his disciples had gone into the town to buy food.
JOH 4:9 ‘How is it,’ replied the Samaritan woman, ‘that you who are a Jew ask for water from a Samaritan woman like me?’ (For Jews do not associate with Samaritans).
JOH 4:10 ‘If you knew of the gift of God,’ replied Jesus, ‘and who it is that is saying to you “Give me some water,” you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.’
JOH 4:11 ‘You have no bucket, Sir, and the well is deep,’ she said. ‘Where did you get that “living water?”
JOH 4:12 Surely you are not greater than our ancestor Jacob who gave us the well, and used to drink from it himself, and his sons, and his cattle!’
JOH 4:13 ‘All who drink of this water,’ replied Jesus, ‘will be thirsty again;
JOH 4:14 but whoever once drinks of the water that I will give him will never thirst any more; but the water that I will give him will become a spring welling up within him – a source of eternal life.’
JOH 4:15 ‘Give me this water, Sir,’ said the woman, ‘so that I may not be thirsty, nor have to come all the way here to draw water.’
JOH 4:16 ‘Go and call your husband,’ said Jesus, ‘and then come back.’
JOH 4:17 ‘I have no husband,’ answered the woman. ‘You are right in saying “I have no husband,”’ replied Jesus,
JOH 4:18 ‘For you have had five husbands, and the man with whom you are now living is not your husband; in saying that, you have spoken the truth.’
JOH 4:19 ‘I see, Sir, that you are a prophet!’ exclaimed the woman.
JOH 4:20 ‘It was on this mountain that our ancestors worshiped; and yet you Jews say that the proper place for worship is in Jerusalem.’
JOH 4:21 ‘Believe me,’ replied Jesus, ‘a time is coming when it will be neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem that you will worship the Father.
JOH 4:22 You Samaritans do not know what you worship; we know what we worship, for salvation comes from the Jews.
JOH 4:23 But a time is coming, indeed it is already here, when the true worshipers will worship the Father spiritually and truly; for such are the worshipers that the Father desires.
JOH 4:24 God is Spirit; and those who worship him must worship spiritually and truly.’
JOH 4:25 ‘I know,’ answered the woman, ‘that the Messiah, who is called the Christ, is coming; when once he has come, he will tell us everything.’
JOH 4:26 ‘I am he,’ Jesus said to her, ‘I who am speaking to you.’
JOH 4:27 At this moment his disciples came up, and were surprised to find him talking with a woman; but none of them asked “What do you want?” or “Why are you talking with her?”
JOH 4:28 So the woman, leaving her pitcher, went back to the town, and said to the people,
JOH 4:29 ‘Come and see someone who has told me everything that I have done. Can he be the Christ?’
JOH 4:30 And the people left the town and went to see Jesus.
JOH 4:31 Meanwhile the disciples kept saying to him, ‘Take something to eat, Rabbi.’
JOH 4:32 ‘I have food to eat,’ he answered, ‘of which you know nothing.’
JOH 4:33 ‘Can anyone have brought him anything to eat?’ the disciples said to one another.
JOH 4:34 ‘My food,’ replied Jesus, ‘is to do the will of him who sent me, and to complete his work.
JOH 4:35 Don’t you say that it still wants four months to harvest? Why, look up, and see how white the fields are for harvest!
JOH 4:36 Already the reaper is receiving wages and gathering in sheaves for eternal life, so that sower and reaper rejoice together.
JOH 4:37 For here the proverb holds good – “One sows, another reaps.”
JOH 4:38 I have sent you to reap that on which you have spent no labour; others have laboured, and you have reaped the results of their labour.’
JOH 4:39 Many from that town came to believe in Jesus – Samaritans though they were – because the woman had said, “He has told me everything that I have done.”
JOH 4:40 And, when these Samaritans had come to Jesus, they begged him to stay with them, and he stayed there two days.
JOH 4:41 But far more came to believe in him because of what he said himself,
JOH 4:42 and they said to the woman, ‘It is no longer because of what you say that we believe in him, for we have heard him ourselves and know that he really is the Saviour of the world.’
JOH 4:43 After these two days Jesus went on to Galilee;
JOH 4:44 for he himself declared that “a prophet is not honoured in his own country.”
JOH 4:45 When he entered Galilee, the Galileans welcomed him, for they had seen all that he did at Jerusalem during the Festival, at which they also had been present.
JOH 4:46 So Jesus came again to Cana in Galilee, where he had turned the water into wine. Now there was one of the king’s officers whose son was lying ill at Capernaum.
JOH 4:47 When this man heard that Jesus had returned from Judea to Galilee, he went to him, and begged him to come down and cure his son; for he was at the point of death.
JOH 4:48 Jesus answered, ‘Unless you all see signs and wonders, you will not believe.’
JOH 4:49 ‘Sir,’ said the officer, ‘come down before my child dies.’ And Jesus answered, ‘Go, your son is living.’
JOH 4:50 The man believed what Jesus said to him, and went;
JOH 4:51 and, while he was on his way down, his servants met him, and told him that his child was living.
JOH 4:52 So he asked them at what time the boy began to get better. ‘It was yesterday, about one o’clock,’ they said, ‘that the fever left him.’
JOH 4:53 By this the father knew that it was at the very time when Jesus had said to him “Your son is living”; and he himself, with all his household, believed in Jesus.
JOH 4:54 This was the second occasion on which Jesus gave a sign of his mission on coming from Judea to Galilee.
JOH 5:1 Sometime after this there was a Jewish Festival; and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
JOH 5:2 There is in Jerusalem, near the sheep-gate, a bath with five colonnades round it. It is called in Hebrew “Bethesda.”
JOH 5:3 In these colonnades a large number of sick people were lying – blind, lame, and crippled.
JOH 5:4 
JOH 5:5 One man who was there had been crippled for thirty-eight years.
JOH 5:6 Jesus saw the man lying there, and, finding that he had been in this state a long time, said to him, ‘Do you wish to be cured?’
JOH 5:7 ‘I have no one, Sir,’ the sick man answered, ‘to put me into the bath when there is a troubling of the water, and, while I am getting to it, someone else steps down before me.’
JOH 5:8 ‘Stand up,’ said Jesus, ‘take up your mat, and walk.’
JOH 5:9 The man was cured immediately, and took up his mat and began walking.
JOH 5:10 Now it was the Sabbath. So the religious authorities said to the man who had been cured, ‘This is the Sabbath; you must not carry your mat.’
JOH 5:11 ‘The man who cured me,’ he answered, ‘said to me “Take up your mat and walk.”’
JOH 5:12 ‘Who was it,’ they asked, ‘that said to you “Take up your mat and walk”?’
JOH 5:13 But the man who had been restored did not know who it was; for Jesus had moved away, because there was a crowd there.
JOH 5:14 Afterwards Jesus found the man in the Temple Courts, and said to him, ‘You are cured now; do not sin again, or something worse may happen to you.’
JOH 5:15 The man went away, and told the authorities that it was Jesus who had cured him.
JOH 5:16 And that was why they began to persecute Jesus – because he did things of this kind on the Sabbath.
JOH 5:17 But Jesus replied, ‘My Father works to this very hour, and I work also.’
JOH 5:18 This made the authorities all the more eager to kill him, because not only was he doing away with the Sabbath, but he actually called God his own Father – putting himself on an equality with God.
JOH 5:19 So Jesus made this further reply, ‘In truth I tell you, the Son can do nothing of himself; he does only what he sees the Father doing; whatever the Father does, the Son does also.
JOH 5:20 For the Father loves his Son, and shows him everything that he is doing; and he will show him still greater things – so that you will be filled with wonder.
JOH 5:21 For, just as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, so also the Son gives life to whom he pleases.
JOH 5:22 The Father himself does not judge any one, but has entrusted the work of judging entirely to his Son,
JOH 5:23 so that everyone may honour the Son, just as they honour the Father. The person who does not honour the Son fails to honour the Father who sent him.
JOH 5:24 In truth I tell you that the person who listens to my message and believes him who sent me, has eternal life, and does not come under condemnation, but has already passed out of death into life.
JOH 5:25 In truth I tell you that a time is coming, indeed it is already here, when the dead will listen to the voice of the Son of God, and when those who listen will live.
JOH 5:26 For, just as the Father has inherent life within him, so also he has granted to the Son to have inherent life within him;
JOH 5:27 and, because he is Son of Man, he has also given him authority to act as judge.
JOH 5:28 Do not wonder at this; for the time is coming when all who are in their graves will hear his voice,
JOH 5:29 and will come out – those who have done good rising to life, and those who have lived evil lives rising for condemnation.
JOH 5:30 I can do nothing of myself; I judge as I am taught; and the judgment that I give is just, because my aim is not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me.
JOH 5:31 ‘If I bear testimony to myself, my testimony is not trustworthy;
JOH 5:32 it is another who bears testimony to me, and I know that the testimony which he bears to me is trustworthy.
JOH 5:33 You have yourselves sent to John, and he has testified to the truth.
JOH 5:34 But the testimony which I receive is not from people; I am saying this for your salvation.
JOH 5:35 He was the Lamp that was burning and shining, and you were ready to rejoice, for a time, in his light.
JOH 5:36 But the testimony which I have is of greater weight than John’s; for the work that the Father has given me to carry out – the work that I am doing – is in itself proof that the Father has sent me as his messenger.
JOH 5:37 The Father who has sent me has himself borne testimony to me. You have neither listened to his voice nor seen his form,
JOH 5:38 and you have not taken his message home to your hearts, because you do not believe him whom he sent as his messenger.
JOH 5:39 You search the scriptures, because you think that you find in them immortal life; and, though it is those scriptures that bear testimony to me,
JOH 5:40 you refuse to come to me to have life.
JOH 5:41 ‘I do not receive honour from people,
JOH 5:42 but I know this of you, that you have not the love of God in your hearts.
JOH 5:43 I have come in my Father’s name, and you do not receive me; if another comes in his own name, you will receive him.
JOH 5:44 How can you believe in me, when you receive honour from one another and do not desire the honour which comes from the only God?
JOH 5:45 Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father; your accuser is Moses, on whom you have been resting your hopes.
JOH 5:46 For, had you believed Moses, you would have believed me, for it was of me that Moses wrote;
JOH 5:47 but, if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my teaching?’
JOH 6:1 After this, Jesus crossed the Sea of Galilee – otherwise called the Lake of Tiberias.
JOH 6:2 A great crowd of people, however, followed him, because they saw the signs of his mission in his work among those who were sick.
JOH 6:3 Jesus went up the hill, and sat down there with his disciples.
JOH 6:4 It was near the time of the Jewish Festival of the Passover.
JOH 6:5 Looking up, and noticing that a great crowd was coming towards him, Jesus said to Philip, ‘Where are we to buy bread for these people to eat?’
JOH 6:6 He said this to test him, for he himself knew what he meant to do.
JOH 6:7 ‘Even if we spent a years’ wages on bread,’ answered Philip, ‘it would not be enough for each of them to have a little.’
JOH 6:8 ‘There is a boy here,’ said Andrew, another of his disciples, Simon Peter’s brother,
JOH 6:9 ‘Who has five barley loaves and two fish; but what is that for so many?’
JOH 6:10 ‘Make the people sit down,’ said Jesus. It was a grassy spot; so the people, who numbered about five thousand, sat down,
JOH 6:11 and then Jesus took the loaves, and, after saying the thanksgiving, distributed them to those who were sitting down; and the same with the fish, giving the people as much as they wanted.
JOH 6:12 When they were satisfied, Jesus said to his disciples, ‘Collect the broken pieces that are left, so that nothing may be wasted.’
JOH 6:13 The disciples did so, and filled twelve baskets with the pieces of the five barley loaves, which were left after all had eaten.
JOH 6:14 When the people saw the signs which Jesus gave, they said, ‘This is certainly the prophet who was to come into the world.’
JOH 6:15 But Jesus, having discovered that they were intending to come and carry him off to make him king, went again up the hill, quite alone.
JOH 6:16 When evening fell, his disciples went down to the sea,
JOH 6:17 and, getting into a boat, began to cross to Capernaum. By this time darkness had set in, and Jesus had not yet come back to them;
JOH 6:18 the sea, too, was getting rough, for a strong wind was blowing.
JOH 6:19 When they had rowed three or four miles, they caught sight of him walking on the water and approaching the boat, and they were frightened.
JOH 6:20 But Jesus said to them, ‘It is I; do not be afraid!’
JOH 6:21 And after this they were glad to take him into the boat; and the boat at once arrived off the shore, for which they had been making.
JOH 6:22 The people who remained on the other side of the sea had seen that only one boat had been there, and that Jesus had not gone into it with his disciples, but that they had left without him.
JOH 6:23 Some boats, however, had come from Tiberias, from near the spot where they had eaten the bread after the Master had said the thanksgiving.
JOH 6:24 So, on the next day, when the people saw that Jesus was not there, or his disciples either, they themselves got into the boats, and went to Capernaum to look for him.
JOH 6:25 And, when they found him on the other side of the sea, they said, ‘When did you get here, Rabbi?’
JOH 6:26 ‘In truth I tell you,’ answered Jesus, ‘it is not because of the signs which you saw that you are looking for me, but because you had the bread to eat and were satisfied.
JOH 6:27 Work, not for the food that perishes, but for the food that lasts for eternal life, which the Son of Man will give you; for on him the Father – God himself – has set the seal of his approval.’
JOH 6:28 ‘How,’ they asked, ‘are we to do the work that God wants us to do?’
JOH 6:29 ‘The work that God wants you to do,’ answered Jesus, ‘is to believe in him whom God sent as his messenger.’
JOH 6:30 ‘What sign, then,’ they asked, ‘are you giving, which we may see, and so believe you? What is the work that you are doing?
JOH 6:31 Our ancestors had the manna to eat in the desert; as scripture says – “He gave them bread from heaven to eat.”’
JOH 6:32 ‘In truth I tell you,’ replied Jesus, ‘Moses did not give you the bread from heaven, but my Father does give you the true bread from heaven;
JOH 6:33 for the bread that God gives is that which comes down from heaven, and gives life to the world.’
JOH 6:34 ‘Master,’ they exclaimed, ‘give us that bread always!’
JOH 6:35 ‘I am the life-giving bread,’ Jesus said to them, ‘whoever comes to me will never be hungry, and whoever believes in me will never thirst again.
JOH 6:36 But, as I have said already, you have seen me, and yet you do not believe in me.
JOH 6:37 All those whom the Father gives me will come to me; and no one who comes to me will I ever turn away.
JOH 6:38 For I have come down from heaven, to do, not my own will, but the will of him who sent me;
JOH 6:39 and his will is this – that I should not lose one of all those whom he has given me, but should raise them up at the Last day.
JOH 6:40 For it is the will of my Father that everyone who sees the Son, and believes in him, should have immortal life; and I myself will raise him up at the Last day.’
JOH 6:41 The people began murmuring against Jesus for saying – “I am the bread which came down from heaven.”
JOH 6:42 ‘Is not this Jesus, Joseph’s son,’ they asked, ‘whose father and mother we know? How is it that he now says that he has come down from heaven?’
JOH 6:43 ‘Do not murmur among yourselves,’ said Jesus in reply.
JOH 6:44 ‘No one can come to me, unless the Father who sent me draws him to me; and I will raise him up at the Last day.
JOH 6:45 It is said in the prophets – “And they will all be taught by God.” Everyone who is taught by the Father and learns from him comes to me.
JOH 6:46 Not that anyone has seen the Father, except him who is from God – he has seen the Father.
JOH 6:47 In truth I tell you, the person who believes in me has eternal life.
JOH 6:48 I am the life-giving bread.
JOH 6:49 Your ancestors ate the manna in the desert, and yet died.
JOH 6:50 The bread that comes down from heaven is such that whoever eats of it will never die.
JOH 6:51 I am the living bread that has come down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, they will live for ever; and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.’
JOH 6:52 They began disputing with one another, ‘How is it possible for this man to give us his flesh to eat?’
JOH 6:53 ‘In truth I tell you,’ answered Jesus, ‘unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, you have not life within you.
JOH 6:54 Everyone who takes my flesh for their food, and drinks my blood, has eternal life; and I will raise them up at the Last day.
JOH 6:55 For my flesh is true food, and my blood true drink.
JOH 6:56 Everyone who takes my flesh for their food, and drinks my blood, remains united to me, and I to them.
JOH 6:57 As the living Father sent me as his messenger, and as I live because the Father lives, so the person who takes me for their food will live because I live.
JOH 6:58 That is the bread which has come down from heaven – not such as your ancestors ate, and yet died; the person who takes this bread for their food will live for ever.’
JOH 6:59 All this Jesus said in a synagogue, when he was teaching in Capernaum.
JOH 6:60 On hearing it, many of his disciples said, ‘This is harsh doctrine! Who can bear to listen to it?’
JOH 6:61 But Jesus, aware that his disciples were murmuring about it, said to them,
JOH 6:62 ‘Is this a hindrance to you? What, then, if you should see the Son of Man ascending where he was before?
JOH 6:63 It is the Spirit that gives life; human strength achieves nothing. In the teaching that I have been giving you there is Spirit and there is life.
JOH 6:64 Yet there are some of you who do not believe in me.’ For Jesus knew from the first who they were that did not believe in him, and who it was that would betray him;
JOH 6:65 and he added, ‘This is why I told you that no one can come to me, unless enabled by the Father.’
JOH 6:66 After this many of his disciples drew back, and did not go about with him any longer.
JOH 6:67 So Jesus said to the Twelve, ‘Do you also wish to leave me?’
JOH 6:68 But Simon Peter answered, ‘Master, to whom would we go? Eternal life is in your teaching;
JOH 6:69 and we have learned to believe and to know that you are the Holy One of God.’
JOH 6:70 ‘Didn’t I myself choose you to be the Twelve?’ replied Jesus, ‘and yet, even of you, one is playing the devil’s part.’
JOH 6:71 He meant Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, who was about to betray him, though he was one of the Twelve.
JOH 7:1 After this, Jesus went about in Galilee, for he would not do so in Judea, because the religious authorities (in Jerusalem) were eager to put him to death.
JOH 7:2 When the Jewish Festival of Tabernacles was near,
JOH 7:3 his brothers said to him, ‘Leave this part of the country, and go into Judea, so that your disciples, as well as we, may see the work that you are doing.
JOH 7:4 For no one does a thing privately, if they are seeking to be widely known. Since you do these things, you should show yourself publicly to the world.’
JOH 7:5 For even his brothers did not believe in him.
JOH 7:6 ‘My time,’ answered Jesus, ‘is not come yet, but your time is always here.
JOH 7:7 The world cannot hate you, but it does hate me, because I testify that its ways are evil.
JOH 7:8 Go yourselves up to the Festival; I am not going to this Festival yet, because my time has not yet come.’
JOH 7:9 After telling them this, he stayed on in Galilee.
JOH 7:10 But, when his brothers had gone up to the Festival, Jesus also went up – not publicly, but privately.
JOH 7:11 The authorities were looking for him at the Festival and asking “Where is he?”;
JOH 7:12 and there were many whispers about him among the people, some saying “He is a good man;” others, “No! He is leading the people astray.”
JOH 7:13 No one, however, spoke freely about him, because they were afraid of the authorities.
JOH 7:14 About the middle of the Festival week, Jesus went up into the Temple Courts, and began teaching.
JOH 7:15 The authorities were astonished. ‘How has this man got his learning,’ they asked, ‘when he has never studied?’
JOH 7:16 So, in reply, Jesus said, ‘My teaching is not my own; it is his who sent me.
JOH 7:17 If anyone has the will to do God’s will, they will find out whether my teaching is from God, or whether I speak on my own authority.
JOH 7:18 The person who speaks on their own authority seeks honour for themselves; but the one who seeks the honour of him who sent him is sincere, and there is nothing false in him.
JOH 7:19 Was not it Moses who gave you the Law? Yet not one of you obeys it! Why are you seeking to put me to death?’
JOH 7:20 ‘You must be possessed by a demon!’ the people exclaimed. ‘Who is seeking to put you to death?’
JOH 7:21 ‘There was one thing I did,’ replied Jesus, ‘at which you are all still wondering.
JOH 7:22 But that is why Moses has instituted circumcision among you – not, indeed, that it began with him, but with our ancestors – and that is why you circumcise even on a Sabbath.
JOH 7:23 When a man receives circumcision on a Sabbath to prevent the Law of Moses from being broken, how can you be angry with me for making a man sound and well on a Sabbath?
JOH 7:24 Do not judge by appearances; judge justly.’
JOH 7:25 At this some of the people of Jerusalem exclaimed, ‘Is not this the man who they are seeking to put to death?
JOH 7:26 Yet here he is, speaking out boldly, and they say nothing to him! Is it possible that our leading men have really discovered that he is the Christ?
JOH 7:27 Yet we know where this man is from; but, when the Christ comes, no one will be able to tell where he is from.’
JOH 7:28 Therefore, Jesus, as he was teaching in the Temple Courts, raised his voice and said, ‘Yes; you know me and you know where I am from. Yet I have not come on my own authority, but he who sent me may be trusted; and him you do not know.
JOH 7:29 I do know him, for it is from him that I have come, and he sent me as his messenger.’
JOH 7:30 So they sought to arrest him; but no one touched him, for his time was not come yet.
JOH 7:31 Many of the people, however, believed in him. ‘When the Christ comes,’ they said, ‘will he give more signs of his mission than this man has given?’
JOH 7:32 The Pharisees heard the people whispering about him in this way, and so the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to arrest him;
JOH 7:33 at which Jesus said, ‘I will be with you but a little longer, and then I am going to him who sent me.
JOH 7:34 You will look for me, and you will not find me; and you will not be able to come where I will be.’
JOH 7:35 ‘Where is this man going,’ the people asked one another, ‘that we would not find him? Will he go to our countrymen abroad, and teach foreigners?
JOH 7:36 What does he mean by saying “You will look for me, and you will not find me; and you will not be able to come where I will be”?’
JOH 7:37 On the last and greatest day of the Festival, Jesus, who was standing by, exclaimed, ‘If anyone is thirsty, they should come to me and drink.
JOH 7:38 From the heart of those who believe in me will flow, as is said in scripture, rivers of living water.’
JOH 7:39 (By this he meant the Spirit, which those who had believed in him were to receive; for the Spirit had not yet come, because Jesus had not yet been exalted.)
JOH 7:40 Some of the people, when they heard these words, said, ‘This is certainly the Prophet!’;
JOH 7:41 others said, ‘the Christ!’; but some asked, ‘What! Does the Christ come from Galilee?
JOH 7:42 Is not it said in scripture that it is of the descendants of David, and from Bethlehem, the village to which David belonged, that the Christ is to come?’
JOH 7:43 So there was a sharp division among the people because of Jesus.
JOH 7:44 Some of them wanted to arrest him, and yet no one touched him.
JOH 7:45 When the officers returned to the chief priests and Pharisees, they were asked, ‘Why have you not brought him?’
JOH 7:46 ‘No one ever spoke as he speaks!’ they answered.
JOH 7:47 ‘What! Have you been led astray too?’ the Pharisees replied.
JOH 7:48 ‘Have any of our leading men believed in him, or any of the Pharisees?
JOH 7:49 As for these people who do not know the Law – they are cursed!’
JOH 7:50 But one of their number, Nicodemus, who before this had been to see Jesus, said to them,
JOH 7:51 ‘Does our Law pass judgment on a person without first giving them a hearing, and finding out what they have been doing?’
JOH 7:52 ‘Are you also from Galilee?’ they retorted. ‘Search, and you will find that no prophet is to arise in Galilee!’
JOH 7:53 And everyone went home
JOH 8:1 except Jesus, who went to the Mount of Olives.
JOH 8:2 But he went again into the Temple Courts early in the morning, and all the people came to him; and he sat down and taught them.
JOH 8:3 Presently, however, the Teachers of the Law and the Pharisees brought a woman who had been caught in adultery, and placed her in the middle of the Court,
JOH 8:4 and said to Jesus, ‘Teacher, this woman was found in the act of adultery.
JOH 8:5 Now Moses, in the Law, commanded us to stone such women to death; what do you say?’
JOH 8:6 They said this to test him, in order to have a charge to bring against him. But Jesus stooped down, and wrote on the ground with his finger.
JOH 8:7 However, as they continued asking him, he raised himself, and said, ‘Let the person among you who has never done wrong throw the first stone at her.’
JOH 8:8 And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground.
JOH 8:9 When they heard that, they went out one by one, beginning with the eldest; and Jesus was left alone with the woman in the middle of the Court.
JOH 8:10 Raising himself, Jesus said to her, ‘Woman, where are they? Did no one condemn you?’
JOH 8:11 ‘No one, Sir,’ she answered. ‘Neither do I condemn you,’ said Jesus ‘go, and do not sin again.’
JOH 8:12 Jesus again addressed the people. ‘I am the light of the world,’ he said. ‘The person who follows me will not walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.’
JOH 8:13 ‘You are bearing testimony to yourself!’ exclaimed the Pharisees, ‘your testimony is not trustworthy.’
JOH 8:14 ‘Even if I bear testimony to myself,’ answered Jesus, ‘my testimony is trustworthy; for I know where I came from, and where I am going; but you do not know where I come from, nor where I am going.
JOH 8:15 You judge by appearances; I judge no one.
JOH 8:16 Yet, even if I were to judge, my judgment would be trustworthy; because I am not alone, but the Father who sent me is with me.
JOH 8:17 Why, in your own Law it is said that the testimony of two persons is trustworthy.
JOH 8:18 I, who bear testimony to myself, am one, and the Father who sent me also bears testimony to me.’
JOH 8:19 ‘Where is your father, then?’ they asked. ‘You know neither me nor my Father,’ replied Jesus. ‘If you had known me, you would have also known my Father.’
JOH 8:20 These statements Jesus made in the Treasury, while teaching in the Temple Courts. Yet no one arrested him, for his time had not then come.
JOH 8:21 Jesus again spoke to the people. ‘I am going away,’ he said, ‘and you will look for me, but you will die in your sin; you cannot come where I am going.’
JOH 8:22 ‘Is he going to kill himself,’ the people exclaimed, ‘that he says – “You cannot go where I am going”?’
JOH 8:23 ‘You,’ added Jesus, ‘are from below, I am from above; you are of this present world, I am not;
JOH 8:24 and so I told you that you would die in your sins, for, unless you believe that I am what I am, you will die in your sins.’
JOH 8:25 ‘Who are you?’ they asked. ‘Why ask exactly what I have been telling you?’ said Jesus.
JOH 8:26 ‘I have still much that concerns you to speak of and to pass judgment on; yet he who sent me may be trusted, and I speak to the world only of the things which I have heard from him.’
JOH 8:27 They did not understand that he meant the Father.
JOH 8:28 So Jesus added, ‘When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will understand that I am what I am, and that I do nothing of myself, but that I say just what the Father has taught me.
JOH 8:29 Moreover, he who sent me is with me; he has not left me alone; for I always do what pleases him.’
JOH 8:30 While he was speaking in this way, many came to believe in him.
JOH 8:31 So Jesus went on to say to those who had believed him, ‘If you remain constant to my message, you are truly my disciples;
JOH 8:32 and you will find out the truth, and the truth will set you free.’
JOH 8:33 ‘We are descendants of Abraham,’ was their answer, ‘and have never yet been in slavery to anyone. What do you mean by saying “you will be set free”?’
JOH 8:34 ‘In truth I tell you,’ replied Jesus, ‘everyone who sins is a slave to sin.
JOH 8:35 And a slave does not remain in the home always; but a son remains always.
JOH 8:36 If, then, the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed!
JOH 8:37 I know that you are descendants of Abraham; yet you are seeking to put me to death, because my message finds no place in your hearts.
JOH 8:38 I tell you what I have myself seen in the presence of my Father; and you, in the same way, do what you have learned from your father.’
JOH 8:39 ‘Our father is Abraham,’ was their answer. ‘If you are Abraham’s children,’ replied Jesus, ‘do what Abraham did.
JOH 8:40 But, as it is, you are seeking to put me to death – a man who has told you the truth as he heard it from God. Abraham did not act in that way.
JOH 8:41 You are doing what your own father does.’ ‘We are not bastards,’ they said, ‘we have one Father – God himself.’
JOH 8:42 ‘If God were your Father,’ Jesus replied, ‘you would have loved me, for I came out from God, and now am here; and I have not come of myself, but he sent me as his messenger.
JOH 8:43 How is it that you do not understand what I say? It is because you cannot bear to listen to my message.
JOH 8:44 As for you, you are children of your father the devil, and you are determined to do what your father loves to do. He was a murderer from the first, and did not stand by the truth, because there is no truth in him. Whenever he lies, he does what is natural to him; because he is a liar, and the father of lying.
JOH 8:45 But, as for me, it is because I speak the truth to you that you do not believe me.
JOH 8:46 Which of you can convict me of sin? Why then don’t you believe me, if I am speaking truth?
JOH 8:47 The person who comes from God listens to God’s teaching; the reason why you do not listen is because you do not come from God.’
JOH 8:48 ‘Aren’t we right, after all,’ replied the people, ‘in saying that you are a Samaritan, and are possessed by a demon?’
JOH 8:49 ‘I am not possessed by a demon,’ Jesus answered, ‘but I am honouring my Father; and yet you dishonour me.
JOH 8:50 Not that I am seeking honour for myself; there is one who is seeking my honour, and he decides.
JOH 8:51 In truth I tell you, if anyone lays my message to heart, he will never really die.’
JOH 8:52 ‘Now we are sure that you are possessed by a demon,’ the people replied. ‘Abraham died, and so did the prophets; and yet you say “If anyone lays my message to heart, they will never know death.”
JOH 8:53 Are you greater than our ancestor Abraham, who died? And the prophets died too. Whom do you make yourself out to be?’
JOH 8:54 ‘If I do honour to myself,’ answered Jesus, ‘such honour counts for nothing. It is my Father who does me honour – and you say that he is your God;
JOH 8:55 and yet you have not learned to know him; but I know him; and, if I were to say that I do not know him, I should be a liar like you; but I do know him, and I lay his message to heart.
JOH 8:56 Your ancestor Abraham rejoiced that he would see my day; and he did see it, and was glad.’
JOH 8:57 ‘You are not fifty years old yet,’ the people exclaimed, ‘and have you seen Abraham?’
JOH 8:58 ‘In truth I tell you,’ replied Jesus, ‘before Abraham existed I was.’
JOH 8:59 At this they took up stones to throw at him; but Jesus hid himself, and left the Temple Courts.
JOH 9:1 As Jesus passed by, he saw a man who had been blind from his birth.
JOH 9:2 ‘Rabbi,’ asked his disciples, ‘who was it that sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?’
JOH 9:3 ‘Neither the man nor the parents,’ replied Jesus, ‘but he was born blind so that the work of God should be made plain in him.
JOH 9:4 We must do the work of him who sent me, while it is day; night is coming, when no one can work.
JOH 9:5 As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.’
JOH 9:6 Saying this, Jesus spat on the ground, made some paste with the saliva, and put it on the man’s eyes.
JOH 9:7 ‘Go,’ he said, ‘and wash your eyes in the Bath of Siloam’ (a word which means “messenger”). So the man went and washed his eyes, and returned able to see.
JOH 9:8 His neighbours, and those who had formerly known him by sight as a beggar, exclaimed, ‘Is not this the man who used to sit and beg?’
JOH 9:9 ‘Yes,’ some said, ‘it is’; while others said, ‘No, but he is like him.’ The man himself said, ‘I am he.’
JOH 9:10 ‘How did you get your sight, then?’ they asked.
JOH 9:11 ‘The man whom they call Jesus,’ he answered, ‘made a paste, and anointed my eyes, and said to me “Go to Siloam and wash your eyes.” So I went and washed my eyes, and gained my sight.’
JOH 9:12 ‘Where is he?’ they asked. ‘I do not know,’ he answered.
JOH 9:13 They took the man, who had been blind, to the Pharisees.
JOH 9:14 Now it was a Sabbath when Jesus made the paste and gave him his sight.
JOH 9:15 So the Pharisees also questioned the man as to how he had gained his sight. ‘He put a paste on my eyes,’ he answered, ‘and I washed them, and I can see.’
JOH 9:16 ‘The man cannot be from God,’ said some of the Pharisees, ‘for he does not keep the Sabbath.’ ‘How is it possible,’ retorted others, ‘for a bad man to give signs like this?’
JOH 9:17 So there was a difference of opinion among them, and they again questioned the man. ‘What do you yourself say about him, for it is to you that he has given sight?’
JOH 9:18 The religious authorities, however, refused to believe that he had been blind and had gained his sight, until they had called his parents and questioned them.
JOH 9:19 ‘Is this your son,’ they asked, ‘who you say was born blind? If so, how is it that he can see now?’
JOH 9:20 ‘We know that this is our son,’ answered the parents, ‘and that he was born blind;
JOH 9:21 but how it is that he can see now we do not know; nor do we know who it was that gave him his sight. Ask him – he is old enough – he will tell you about himself.’
JOH 9:22 His parents spoke in this way because they were afraid of the authorities; for the authorities had already agreed that, if anyone should acknowledge Jesus as the Christ, he should be expelled from their synagogues.
JOH 9:23 This was why his parents said “He is old enough; ask him.”
JOH 9:24 So the authorities again called the man who had been blind, and said to him, ‘Give God the praise; we know that this is a bad man.’
JOH 9:25 ‘I know nothing about his being a bad man,’ he replied. ‘One thing I do know, that although I was blind, now I can see.’
JOH 9:26 ‘What did he do to you?’ they asked. ‘How did he give you your sight?’
JOH 9:27 ‘I told you just now,’ he answered, ‘and you did not listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Surely you also do not want to become his disciples?’
JOH 9:28 ‘You are his disciple,’ they retorted scornfully. ‘But we are disciples of Moses.
JOH 9:29 We know that God spoke to Moses; but, as for this man, we do not know where he comes from.’
JOH 9:30 ‘Well,’ the man replied, ‘this is very strange; you do not know where he comes from, and yet he has given me my sight!
JOH 9:31 We know that God never listens to bad people, but, when a person is god-fearing and does God’s will, God listens to them.
JOH 9:32 Since the world began, such a thing was never heard of as anyone’s giving sight to a person born blind.
JOH 9:33 If this man had not been from God, he could not have done anything at all.’
JOH 9:34 ‘You,’ they retorted, ‘were born totally depraved; and are you trying to teach us?’ So they expelled him.
JOH 9:35 Jesus heard of their having put him out; and, when he had found the man, he asked, ‘Do you believe in the Son of Man?’
JOH 9:36 ‘Tell me who he is, Sir,’ he replied, ‘so that I may believe in him.’
JOH 9:37 ‘Not only have you seen him,’ said Jesus, ‘but it is he who is now speaking to you.’
JOH 9:38 ‘Then, Sir, I do believe,’ said the man, bowing to the ground before him;
JOH 9:39 and Jesus added, ‘It was to put people to the test that I came into this world, in order that those that cannot see should see, and that those that can see should become blind.’
JOH 9:40 Hearing this, some of the Pharisees who were with him said, ‘Then are we blind too?’
JOH 9:41 ‘If you had been blind,’ replied Jesus, ‘you would have had no sin to answer for; but, as it is, you say “We can see,” and so your sin remains.
JOH 10:1 In truth I tell you, whoever does not go into the sheepfold through the door, but climbs up at some other place, that person is a thief and a robber;
JOH 10:2 but the person who goes in through the door is shepherd to the sheep.
JOH 10:3 For him the watchman opens the door; and the sheep listen to his voice; and he calls his own sheep by name, and leads them out.
JOH 10:4 When he has brought them all out, he walks in front of them, and his sheep follow him, because they know his voice.
JOH 10:5 They will not follow a stranger, but will run away from him; because they do not know a stranger’s voice.’
JOH 10:6 This was the allegory that Jesus told them, but they did not understand of what he was speaking.
JOH 10:7 So he continued, ‘In truth I tell you, I am the door for the sheep.
JOH 10:8 All who came before me were thieves and robbers; but the sheep did not listen to them.
JOH 10:9 I am the door; he who goes in through me will be safe, and he will go in and out and find pasture.
JOH 10:10 The thief comes only to steal, to kill, and to destroy; I have come so that they may have life, and may have it in greater fullness.
JOH 10:11 I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep.
JOH 10:12 The hired man who is not a shepherd, and who does not own the sheep, when he sees a wolf coming, leaves them and runs away; then the wolf seizes them, and scatters the flock.
JOH 10:13 He does this because he is only a hired man and does not care about the sheep.
JOH 10:14 I am the good shepherd; and I know my sheep, and my sheep know me –
JOH 10:15 Just as the Father knows me and I know the Father – and I lay down my life for the sheep.
JOH 10:16 I have other sheep besides, which do not belong to this fold; I must lead them also, and they will listen to my voice; and they will become one flock under one shepherd.
JOH 10:17 This is why the Father loves me, because I lay down my life – to receive it again.
JOH 10:18 No one took it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to receive it again. This is the command which I received from my Father.’
JOH 10:19 In consequence of these words a difference of opinion again arose among the people.
JOH 10:20 Many of them said, ‘He is possessed by a demon and is mad; why do you listen to him?’
JOH 10:21 Others said, ‘This is not the teaching of one who is possessed by a demon. Can a demon give sight to the blind?’
JOH 10:22 Soon after this the Festival of the Rededication was held at Jerusalem.
JOH 10:23 It was winter; and Jesus was walking in the Temple Courts, in the Colonnade of Solomon,
JOH 10:24 when the people gathered round him, and said, ‘How long are you going to keep us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us so frankly.’
JOH 10:25 ‘I have told you so,’ replied Jesus, ‘and you do not believe me. The work that I am doing in my Father’s name bears testimony to me.
JOH 10:26 But you do not believe me, because you are not of my flock.
JOH 10:27 My sheep listen to my voice; I know them, and they follow me;
JOH 10:28 and I give them eternal life, and they will not be lost; nor will anyone snatch them out of my hands.
JOH 10:29 What my Father has entrusted to me is more than all else; and no one can snatch anything out of the Father’s hands.
JOH 10:30 The Father and I are one.’
JOH 10:31 Some of the people again brought stones to throw at him;
JOH 10:32 and seeing this, Jesus said, ‘I have done before your eyes many good actions, inspired by the Father; for which of them would you stone me?’
JOH 10:33 ‘It is not for any good action that we would stone you,’ they answered, ‘but for blasphemy; and because you, who are only a man, make yourself out to be God.’
JOH 10:34 ‘Are there not,’ replied Jesus, ‘these words in your Law – “I said, You are gods”?
JOH 10:35 If those to whom God’s word were addressed were said to be “gods” – and scripture cannot be set aside –
JOH 10:36 do you say of one whom the Father has consecrated and sent as his messenger to the world “You are blaspheming,” because I said “I am God’s Son”?
JOH 10:37 If I am not doing the work that my Father is doing, do not believe me;
JOH 10:38 if I am doing it, even though you do not believe me, believe what that work shows; so that you may understand, and understand more and more clearly, that the Father is in union with me, and I with the Father.’
JOH 10:39 The authorities again sought to arrest him; but he escaped their hands.
JOH 10:40 Then Jesus again crossed the Jordan to the place where John used to baptise at first, and stayed there some time, during which many people came to see him.
JOH 10:41 ‘John gave no sign of his mission,’ they said. ‘But everything that he said about this man was true.’
JOH 10:42 And many learned to believe in Jesus there.
JOH 11:1 Now a man named Lazarus, of Bethany, was lying ill; he belonged to the same village as Mary and her sister Martha.
JOH 11:2 This Mary, whose brother Lazarus was ill, was the Mary who anointed the Master with perfume, and wiped his feet with her hair.
JOH 11:3 The sisters, therefore, sent this message to Jesus – “Master, your friend is ill”;
JOH 11:4 and, when Jesus heard it, he said, ‘This illness is not to end in death, but is to redound to the honour of God, in order that the Son of God may be honoured through it.’
JOH 11:5 Jesus loved Martha and her sister, and Lazarus.
JOH 11:6 Yet, when he heard of the illness of Lazarus, he still stayed two days in the place where he was.
JOH 11:7 Then, after that, he said to his disciples, ‘Let us go to Judea again.’
JOH 11:8 ‘Rabbi,’ they replied, ‘the authorities there were but just now seeking to stone you; and are you going there again?’
JOH 11:9 ‘Are not there twelve hours in the day?’ answered Jesus. ‘If someone walks about in the daytime, they don’t stumble, because they can see the light of the sun;
JOH 11:10 but, if they walk about at night, they stumble, because they have not the light.’
JOH 11:11 And, when he had said this, he added, ‘Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep; but I am going so that I may wake him.’
JOH 11:12 ‘If he has fallen asleep, Master, he will get well,’ said the disciples.
JOH 11:13 But Jesus meant that he was dead; they, however, supposed that he was speaking of natural sleep.
JOH 11:14 Then he said to them plainly, ‘Lazarus is dead;
JOH 11:15 and I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, so that you may learn to believe in me. But let us go to him.’
JOH 11:16 At this, Thomas, who was called “The Twin,” said to his fellow disciples, ‘Let us go too, so that we may die with him.’
JOH 11:17 When Jesus reached the place, he found that Lazarus had been four days in the tomb already.
JOH 11:18 Bethany being only about two miles from Jerusalem,
JOH 11:19 a number of the people had come there to comfort Martha and Mary because of their brother’s death.
JOH 11:20 When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went to meet him; but Mary sat quietly at home.
JOH 11:21 ‘Master,’ Martha said to Jesus, ‘if you had been here, my brother would not have died.
JOH 11:22 Even now, I know that God will grant you whatever you ask him.’
JOH 11:23 ‘Your brother will rise to life,’ said Jesus.
JOH 11:24 ‘I know that he will,’ replied Martha, ‘in the resurrection at the Last day.’
JOH 11:25 ‘I am the resurrection and the life,’ said Jesus. ‘He who believes in me will live, though he die;
JOH 11:26 and he who lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this?’
JOH 11:27 ‘Yes Master,’ she answered. ‘I have learned to believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who was to come into the world.’
JOH 11:28 After saying this, Martha went and called her sister Mary, and whispered, ‘The teacher is here, and is asking for you.’
JOH 11:29 As soon as Mary heard that, she got up quickly, and went to meet him.
JOH 11:30 Jesus had not then come into the village, but was still at the place where Martha had met him.
JOH 11:31 So the people, who were in the house with Mary, comforting her, when they saw her get up quickly and go out, followed her, thinking that she was going to the tomb to weep there.
JOH 11:32 When Mary came where Jesus was and saw him, she threw herself at his feet. ‘Master,’ she exclaimed, ‘if you had been here, my brother would not have died!’
JOH 11:33 When Jesus saw her weeping, and the people who had come with her weeping also, he groaned deeply, and was greatly distressed.
JOH 11:34 ‘Where have you buried him?’ he asked. ‘Come and see, Master,’ they answered.
JOH 11:35 Jesus burst into tears.
JOH 11:36 ‘How he must have loved him!’ the people exclaimed;
JOH 11:37 but some of them said, ‘Could not this man, who gave sight to the blind man, have also prevented Lazarus from dying?’
JOH 11:38 Again groaning inwardly, Jesus came to the tomb. It was a cave, and a stone lay against the mouth of it.
JOH 11:39 ‘Move the stone away,’ said Jesus. ‘Master,’ said Martha, the sister of the dead man, ‘by this time the smell must be offensive, for this is the fourth day since his death.’
JOH 11:40 ‘Didn’t I tell you,’ replied Jesus, ‘that, if you would believe in me, you should see the glory of God?’
JOH 11:41 So they moved the stone away; and Jesus, with uplifted eyes, said, ‘Father, I thank you that you have heard my prayer.
JOH 11:42 I know that you always hear me; but I say this for the sake of the people standing near, so that they may believe that you have sent me as your messenger.’
JOH 11:43 Then, after saying this, Jesus called in a loud voice, ‘Lazarus! Come out!’
JOH 11:44 The dead man came out, wrapped hand and foot in a winding-sheet; his face, too, had been wrapped in a cloth. ‘Set him free,’ said Jesus, ‘and let him go.’
JOH 11:45 In consequence of this, many of the people, who had come to visit Mary and had seen what Jesus did, put their faith in him.
JOH 11:46 Some of them, however, went to the Pharisees, and told them what he had done.
JOH 11:47 The chief priests and the Pharisees called a meeting of the High Council, and said, ‘What are we to do, now that this man is giving so many signs?
JOH 11:48 If we allow him to continue as we are doing, everyone will believe in him; and the Romans will come and will take from us both our Temple and our nation.’
JOH 11:49 One of them, however, Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said to them,
JOH 11:50 ‘You are utterly mistaken. You do not consider that it is better for you that one person should die for the people, rather than the whole nation should be destroyed.’
JOH 11:51 Now he did not say this of his own accord; but, as high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus was to die for the nation –
JOH 11:52 And not for the nation only, but also that he might unite in one body the children of God now scattered far and wide.
JOH 11:53 So from that day they plotted to put Jesus to death.
JOH 11:54 In consequence of this, Jesus did not go about publicly among the people any more, but left and went into the country bordering on the wilderness, to a town called Ephraim, where he stayed with his disciples.
JOH 11:55 But the Jewish Festival of the Passover was near; and many people had gone up from the country to Jerusalem, for their purification, before the Festival began.
JOH 11:56 So they looked for Jesus there, and said to one another, as they stood in the Temple Courts, ‘What do you think? Do you think he will come to the Festival?’
JOH 11:57 The chief priests and the Pharisees had already issued orders that, if anyone learned where Jesus was, he should give information, so that they might arrest him.
JOH 12:1 Six days before the Passover Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead, was living.
JOH 12:2 There a supper was given in his honour at which Martha waited, while Lazarus was one of those present at the table.
JOH 12:3 So Mary took a pound of choice spikenard perfume of great value, and anointed the feet of Jesus with it, and then wiped them with her hair. The whole house was filled with the scent of the perfume.
JOH 12:4 One of the disciples, Judas Iscariot, who was about to betray Jesus, asked,
JOH 12:5 ‘Why was not this perfume sold for a year’s wages, and the money given to poor people?’
JOH 12:6 He said this, not because he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and, being in charge of the purse, used to take what was put in it.
JOH 12:7 ‘Leave her alone,’ said Jesus, ‘so that she may keep it until the day when my body is being prepared for burial.
JOH 12:8 The poor you always have with you, but you will not always have me.’
JOH 12:9 Now great numbers of people found out that Jesus was at Bethany; and they came there, not only because of him, but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.
JOH 12:10 The chief priests, however, plotted to put Lazarus, as well as Jesus, to death,
JOH 12:11 because it was owing to him that many of the people had left them, and were becoming believers in Jesus.
JOH 12:12 On the following day great numbers of people who had come to the Festival, hearing that Jesus was on his way to Jerusalem, took palm branches,
JOH 12:13 and went out to meet him, shouting as they went, ‘God save him! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord – the king of Israel!’
JOH 12:14 Having found a young donkey, Jesus seated himself on it, in accordance with the passage of scripture –
JOH 12:15 “Fear not, people of Zion. Your king is coming to you, sitting on the foal of a donkey.”
JOH 12:16 His disciples did not understand all this at first; but, when Jesus had been exalted, then they remembered that these things had been said of him in scripture, and that they had done these things for him.
JOH 12:17 Meanwhile the people who were with him, when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead, were telling what they had seen.
JOH 12:18 This, indeed, was why the crowd met him – because people had heard that he had given this sign of his mission.
JOH 12:19 So the Pharisees said to one another, ‘You see that you are gaining nothing! Why, all the world has run after him!’
JOH 12:20 Among those who were going up to worship at the Festival were some Greeks,
JOH 12:21 who went to Philip of Bethsaida in Galilee, and said, ‘Sir, we wish to see Jesus.’
JOH 12:22 Philip went and told Andrew, and then together they went and told Jesus.
JOH 12:23 This was his reply – ‘The time has come for the Son of Man to be exalted.
JOH 12:24 In truth I tell you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the ground and dies, it remains solitary; but, if it dies, it becomes fruitful.
JOH 12:25 A person who loves their life loses it; while someone who hates their life in the present world will preserve it for eternal life.
JOH 12:26 If someone is ready to serve me, let them follow me; and where I am, there my servant will be also. If a person is ready to serve me, my Father will honour them.
JOH 12:27 Now I am distressed at heart and what can I say? Father, bring me safe through this hour – yet it was for this reason that I came to this hour –
JOH 12:28 Father, honour your own name.’ At this there came a voice from heaven, which said, ‘I have already honoured it, and I will honour it again.’
JOH 12:29 The crowd of bystanders, who heard the sound, said that it was thundering. Others said, ‘An angel has been speaking to him.’
JOH 12:30 ‘It was not for my sake that the voice came,’ said Jesus, ‘but for yours.
JOH 12:31 Now this world is on its trial. Now the Spirit that is ruling this world will be driven out;
JOH 12:32 and I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.’
JOH 12:33 By these words he indicated what death he was destined to die.
JOH 12:34 ‘We,’ replied the people, ‘have learned from the Law that the Christ is to remain for ever; how is it, then, that you say that the Son of Man must be “lifted up” Who is this “Son of Man”?’
JOH 12:35 ‘Only a little while longer,’ answered Jesus, ‘will you have the light among you. Travel on while you have the light, so that darkness may not overtake you; he who travels in the darkness does not know where he is going.
JOH 12:36 While you still have the light, believe in the light, so that you may be children of light.’ After he had said this, Jesus went away, and hid himself from them.
JOH 12:37 But, though Jesus had given so many signs of his mission before their eyes, they still did not believe in him,
JOH 12:38 in fulfilment of the words of the prophet Isaiah, where he says – “Lord, who has believed our teaching? And to whom has the might of the Lord been revealed?”
JOH 12:39 The reason why they were unable to believe is given by Isaiah elsewhere, in these words –
JOH 12:40 “He has blinded their eyes, and blunted their mind, so that they should not see with their eyes, and perceive with their mind, and turn – And I should heal them.”
JOH 12:41 Isaiah said this, because he saw Christ’s glory; and it was of him that he spoke.
JOH 12:42 Yet for all this, even among the leading men there were many who came to believe in Jesus; but, because of the Pharisees, they did not acknowledge it, because they were afraid that they should be expelled from their synagogues;
JOH 12:43 for they valued honour from people more than honour from God.
JOH 12:44 But Jesus had proclaimed, ‘He who believes in me believes, not in me, but in him who sent me;
JOH 12:45 and he who sees me sees him who sent me.
JOH 12:46 I have come as a light into the world, so that no one who believes in me should remain in the darkness.
JOH 12:47 When anyone hears my teaching and pays no heed to it, I am not his judge; for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.
JOH 12:48 He who rejects me, and disregards my teaching, has a judge already – the message which I have delivered will itself be his judge at the Last day.
JOH 12:49 For I have not delivered it on my own authority; but the Father, who sent me, has himself given me his command as to what I should say, and what message I should deliver.
JOH 12:50 And I know that eternal life lies in keeping his command. Therefore, whatever I say, I say only what the Father has taught me.’
JOH 13:1 Before the Passover Festival began, Jesus knew that the time had come for him to leave the world and go to the Father. He had loved those who were his own in the world, and he loved them to the last.
JOH 13:2 The devil had already put the thought of betraying Jesus into the mind of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon;
JOH 13:3 and at supper, Jesus – although knowing that the Father had put everything into his hands, and that he had come from God, and was to return to God –
JOH 13:4 rose from his place, and, taking off his upper garments, tied a towel round his waist.
JOH 13:5 He then poured some water into the basin, and began to wash the disciples’ feet, and to wipe them with the towel which was tied round him.
JOH 13:6 When he came to Simon Peter, Peter said, ‘You, Master! Are you going to wash my feet?’
JOH 13:7 ‘You do not understand now what I am doing,’ replied Jesus, ‘but you will learn by and by.’
JOH 13:8 ‘You will never wash my feet!’ exclaimed Peter. ‘Unless I wash you,’ answered Jesus, ‘you have nothing in common with me.’
JOH 13:9 ‘Then, Master, not my feet only,’ exclaimed Simon Peter, ‘but also my hands and my head.’
JOH 13:10 ‘He who has bathed,’ replied Jesus, ‘has no need to wash, unless it be his feet, but is altogether clean; and you,’ he said to the disciples, ‘are clean, yet not all of you.’
JOH 13:11 For he knew who was going to betray him, and that was why he said “You are not all clean.”
JOH 13:12 When he had washed their feet, and had put on his upper garments and taken his place, he spoke to them again. ‘Do you understand what I have been doing to you?’ he asked.
JOH 13:13 ‘You yourselves call me “the teacher” and “the Master”, and you are right, for I am both.
JOH 13:14 If I, then – “the Master” and “the teacher” – have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another’s feet;
JOH 13:15 for I have given you an example, so that you may do just as I have done to you.
JOH 13:16 In truth I tell you, a servant is not greater than their master, neither is a messenger greater than the one who sends them.
JOH 13:17 Now that you know these things, happy are you if you do them.
JOH 13:18 I am not speaking about all of you. I know whom I have chosen; but this is in fulfilment of the words of scripture – “He that is eating my bread has lifted his heel against me.”
JOH 13:19 For the future I will tell you of things before they take place, so that, when they take place, you may believe that I am what I am.
JOH 13:20 In truth I tell you, the one who receives anyone that I send receives me; and the person who receives me receives him who sent me.’
JOH 13:21 After saying this, Jesus was much troubled, and said solemnly, ‘In truth I tell you that it is one of you who will betray me.’
JOH 13:22 The disciples looked at one another, wondering whom he meant.
JOH 13:23 Next to Jesus, in the place on his right hand, was one of his disciples, whom he loved.
JOH 13:24 So Simon Peter made signs to that disciple, and whispered, ‘Tell me who it is that he means.’
JOH 13:25 Being in this position, that disciple leant back on Jesus’ shoulder, and asked him, ‘Who is it, Master?’
JOH 13:26 ‘It is the one,’ answered Jesus, ‘to whom I will give a piece of bread after dipping it in the dish.’ And, when Jesus had dipped the bread, he took it and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot;
JOH 13:27 and it was then, after he had received it, that Satan took possession of him. So Jesus said to him, ‘Do at once what you are going to do.’
JOH 13:28 But no one at the table understood why he said this to Judas.
JOH 13:29 Some thought that, as Judas kept the purse, Jesus meant that he was to buy some things needed for the Festival, or to give something to the poor.
JOH 13:30 After taking the piece of bread, Judas went out immediately; and it was night.
JOH 13:31 When Judas had gone out, Jesus said, ‘Now the Son of Man has been exalted, and God has been exalted through him;
JOH 13:32 and God will exalt him with himself – yes, he will exalt him forthwith.
JOH 13:33 My children, I am to be with you but a little while longer. You will look for me; and what I said to the people – “You cannot come where I am going” – I now say to you.
JOH 13:34 I give you a new commandment – love one another; love one another as I have loved you.
JOH 13:35 It is by this that everyone will recognise you as my disciples – by your loving one another.’
JOH 13:36 ‘Where are you going, Master?’ asked Peter. ‘I am going where you cannot now follow me,’ answered Jesus, ‘but you will follow me later.’
JOH 13:37 ‘Why cannot I follow you now, Master?’ asked Peter. ‘I will lay down my life for you.’
JOH 13:38 ‘Will you lay down your life for me?’ replied Jesus. ‘In truth I tell you, the cock will not crow until you have disowned me three times.
JOH 14:1 Do not let your hearts be troubled. Believe in God; believe also in me.
JOH 14:2 In my Father’s home there are many dwellings. If it had not been so, I should have told you, for I am going to prepare a place for you.
JOH 14:3 And, since I go and prepare a place for you, I will return and take you to be with me, so that you may be where I am;
JOH 14:4 and you know the way to the place where I am going.’
JOH 14:5 ‘We do not know where you are going, Master,’ said Thomas. ‘So how can we know the way?’
JOH 14:6 Jesus answered, ‘I am the way, and the truth, and the life; no one ever comes to the Father except through me.
JOH 14:7 If you had recognised me, you would have known my Father also; for the future you will recognise him, indeed you have already seen him.’
JOH 14:8 ‘Master, show us the Father,’ said Philip, ‘and we will be satisfied.’
JOH 14:9 ‘Have I been all this time among you,’ said Jesus, ‘and yet you, Philip, have not recognised me? The person who has seen me has seen the Father, how can you say, then, “Show us the Father”?
JOH 14:10 Don’t you believe that I am in union with the Father, and the Father with me? In giving you my teaching I am not speaking on my own authority; but the Father himself, always in union with me, does his own work.
JOH 14:11 Believe me,’ he said to them all, ‘when I say that I am in union with the Father and the Father with me, or else believe me because of the work itself.
JOH 14:12 In truth I tell you, the person who believes in me will themselves do the work that I am doing; and they will do greater work still, because I am going to the Father.
JOH 14:13 Whatever you ask, in my name, I will do, so that the Father may be honoured in the Son.
JOH 14:14 If you ask anything, in my name, I will do it.
JOH 14:15 If you love me, you will lay my commands to heart,
JOH 14:16 and I will ask the Father, and he will give you another helper, to be with you always – the Spirit of truth.
JOH 14:17 The world cannot receive this Spirit, because it does not see him or recognise him, but you recognise him, because he is always with you, and is within you.
JOH 14:18 I will not leave you bereaved; I will come to you.
JOH 14:19 In a little while the world will see me no more, but you will still see me; because I am living, you will be living also.
JOH 14:20 At that time you will recognise that I am in union with the Father, and you with me, and I with you.
JOH 14:21 It is the person who has my commands and lays them to heart who loves me; and the person who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love them, and will reveal myself to them.’
JOH 14:22 ‘What has happened, Master,’ said Judas (not Judas Iscariot), ‘that you are going to reveal yourself to us, and not to the world?’
JOH 14:23 ‘Whoever loves me,’ Jesus answered, ‘will lay my message to heart; and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him.
JOH 14:24 The person who does not love me will not lay my message to heart; and the message to which you are listening is not my own, but comes from the Father who sent me.
JOH 14:25 I have told you all this while still with you,
JOH 14:26 but the helper – the Holy Spirit whom the Father will send in my name – will teach you all things, and will recall to your minds all that I have said to you.
JOH 14:27 Peace be with you! My own peace I give you. I do not give to you as the world gives. Do not let your hearts be troubled, or dismayed.
JOH 14:28 You heard me say that I was going away and would return to you. Had you loved me, you would have been glad that I was going to the Father, because the Father is greater than I.
JOH 14:29 And this I have told you now before it happens, so that, when it does happen, you may still believe in me.
JOH 14:30 I will not talk with you much more, for the Spirit that is ruling the world is coming. He has nothing in common with me;
JOH 14:31 but he is coming so that the world may see that I love the Father, and that I do as the Father commanded me. Come, let us be going.
JOH 15:1 ‘I am the true vine, and my Father is the vine-grower.
JOH 15:2 Any unfruitful branch in me he takes away, and he cleanses every fruitful branch, so that it may bear more fruit.
JOH 15:3 You are already clean because of the message that I have given you.
JOH 15:4 Remain united to me, and I will remain united to you. As a branch cannot bear fruit by itself, unless it remains united to the vine; no more can you, unless you remain united to me.
JOH 15:5 I am the vine, you are the branches. If you remain united to me, while I remain united to you – you bear fruit plentifully; for you can do nothing apart from me.
JOH 15:6 If anyone does not remain united to me, they are thrown away, as a branch would be, and withers up. Such branches are collected and thrown into the fire, and are burnt.
JOH 15:7 If you remain united to me, and my teaching remains in your hearts, ask whatever you wish, and it will be yours.
JOH 15:8 It is by your bearing fruit plentifully, and so showing yourselves my disciples, that my Father is honoured.
JOH 15:9 As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you; remain in my love.
JOH 15:10 If you lay my commands to heart, you will remain in my love; just as I have laid the Father’s commands to heart and remain in his love.
JOH 15:11 I have told you all this so that my own joy may be yours, and that your joy may be complete.
JOH 15:12 This is my command – love one another, as I have loved you.
JOH 15:13 No one can give greater proof of love than by laying down their life for their friends.
JOH 15:14 And you are my friends, if you do what I command you.
JOH 15:15 I no longer call you “servants,” because a servant does not know what their master is doing; but I have given you the name of “friends,” because I made known to you everything that I learned from my Father.
JOH 15:16 It wasn’t you who chose me, but I who chose you, and I appointed you to go and bear fruit – fruit that should remain, so that the Father might grant you whatever you ask in my name.
JOH 15:17 I am giving you these commands that you may love one another.
JOH 15:18 If the world hates you, you know that it has first hated me.
JOH 15:19 If you belonged to the world, the world would love its own. Because you do not belong to the world, but I have chosen you out of the world – that is why the world hates you.
JOH 15:20 Remember what I said to you – “A servant is not greater than their master.” If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have laid my message to heart, they will lay yours to heart also.
JOH 15:21 But they will do all this to you, because you believe in my name, for they do not know him who sent me.
JOH 15:22 If I had not come and spoken to them, they would have had no sin to answer for; but as it is, they have no excuse for their sin.
JOH 15:23 The person who hates me hates my Father also.
JOH 15:24 If I had not done among them such work as no one else ever did, they would have had no sin to answer for; but, as it is, they have both seen and hated both me and my Father.
JOH 15:25 And so is fulfilled what is said in their Law – “They hated me without cause.”
JOH 15:26 But, when the helper comes, whom I will send to you from the Father – the Spirit of truth, who comes from the Father – will bear testimony to me;
JOH 15:27 yes, and you also are to bear testimony, because you have been with me from the first.
JOH 16:1 ‘I have spoken to you in this way so that you may not falter.
JOH 16:2 They will expel you from their synagogues; indeed the time is coming when anyone who kills you will think that they are making an offering to God.
JOH 16:3 They will do this, because they have not learned to know the Father, or even me.
JOH 16:4 But I have spoken to you of these things so that, when the time for them comes, you may remember that I told you about them myself.
JOH 16:5 I did not tell you all this at first, because I was with you. But now I am to return to him who sent me; and yet not one of you asks me – “Where are you going?”
JOH 16:6 Although your hearts are full of sorrow at all that I have been saying to you.
JOH 16:7 Yet I am only telling you the truth; it is for your good that I should go away. For otherwise the helper will never come to you, but, if I leave you, I will send him to you.
JOH 16:8 And he, when he comes, will bring conviction to the world as to sin, and as to righteousness, and as to judgment;
JOH 16:9 as to sin, for people do not believe in me;
JOH 16:10 as to righteousness, for I am going to the Father, and you will see me no longer;
JOH 16:11 as to judgment, for the Spirit that is ruling this world has been condemned.
JOH 16:12 I have still much to say to you, but you cannot bear it now.
JOH 16:13 Yet when he – The Spirit of truth – comes, he will guide you into all truth; for he will not speak on his own authority, but he will speak of all that he hears; and he will tell you of the things that are to come.
JOH 16:14 He will honour me; because he will take of what is mine, and will tell it to you.
JOH 16:15 Everything that the Father has is mine; that is why I said that he takes of what is mine, and will tell it to you.
JOH 16:16 In a little while you will no longer see me; and then in a little while you will see me indeed.’
JOH 16:17 At this some of his disciples said to one another, ‘What does he mean by saying to us “In a little while you will not see me, and then in a little while you will see me indeed”; and by saying “Because I am going to the Father”?
JOH 16:18 What does he mean by “In a little while”?’ they said. ‘We do not know what he is speaking about.’
JOH 16:19 Jesus saw that they were wanting to ask him a question, and said, ‘Are you trying to find out from one another what I meant by saying “In a little while you will not see me; and then in a little while you will see me indeed”?
JOH 16:20 In truth I tell you that you will weep and mourn, but the world will rejoice; you will suffer pain, but your pain will turn to joy.
JOH 16:21 A woman in labour is in pain because her time has come; but no sooner is the child born, than she forgets her trouble in her joy that a child has been born into the world.
JOH 16:22 You, in the same way, are sorry now; but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will rob you of your joy.
JOH 16:23 And at that time you will not ask me anything; in truth I tell you, if you ask the Father for anything, he will grant it to you in my name.
JOH 16:24 So far you have not asked for anything, in my name; ask, and you will receive, so that your joy may be complete.
JOH 16:25 I have spoken to you of all this in figures; a time is coming, however, when I will not speak any longer to you in figures, but will tell you about the Father plainly.
JOH 16:26 You will ask, at that time, in my name; and I do not say that I will intercede with the Father for you;
JOH 16:27 for the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and have believed that I came from the Father.
JOH 16:28 I came out from the Father, and have come into the world; and now I am to leave the world, and go to the Father.’
JOH 16:29 ‘At last,’ exclaimed the disciples, ‘you are using plain words and not speaking in figures at all.
JOH 16:30 Now we are sure that you know everything, and need not wait for anyone to question you. This makes us believe that you did come from God.’
JOH 16:31 ‘Do you believe that already?’ Jesus answered.
JOH 16:32 ‘Listen! A time is coming – indeed it has already come – when you are to be scattered, each going his own way, and to leave me alone; and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
JOH 16:33 I have spoken to you in this way, so that in me you may find peace. In the world you will find trouble; yet, take courage! I have conquered the world.’
JOH 17:1 After saying this, Jesus raised his eyes heavenwards, and said: ‘Father, the hour has come; honour your Son, so that your Son may honour you;
JOH 17:2 even as you gave him power over all humanity, so that he should give eternal life to everyone you have given him.
JOH 17:3 And the eternal life is this – to know you the one true God, and Jesus Christ whom you have sent as your messenger.
JOH 17:4 I have honoured you on earth by completing the work which you have given me to do;
JOH 17:5 and now do you honour me, Father, at your own side, with the honour which I had at your side before the world began.
JOH 17:6 I have revealed you to those whom you gave me from the world; they were your own, and you gave them to me; and they have laid your message to heart.
JOH 17:7 They recognise now that everything that you gave me was from you;
JOH 17:8 for I have given them the teaching which you gave me, and they received it, and clearly understood that I came from you, and they believed that you have sent me as your messenger.
JOH 17:9 I intercede for them; I am not interceding for the world, but for those whom you have given me, for they are your own –
JOH 17:10 All that is mine is yours, and all that is yours is mine – and I am honoured in them.
JOH 17:11 Now I am to be in this world no longer, but they are still to be in the world, and I am to come to you. Holy Father, keep them by that revelation of your name which you have given me, so that they may be one, as we are.
JOH 17:12 While I was with them, I kept them by that revelation, and I have guarded them; and not one of them has been lost, except that lost soul – in fulfilment of scripture.
JOH 17:13 But now I am to come to you; and I am speaking like this, while still in the world, so that they may have my own joy, in all its fullness, in their hearts.
JOH 17:14 I have given them your message; and the world hated them, because they do not belong to the world, even as I do not belong to the world.
JOH 17:15 I do not ask you to take them out of the world, but to keep them from evil.
JOH 17:16 They do not belong to the world, even as I do not belong to the world.
JOH 17:17 Consecrate them by the truth; your message is truth.
JOH 17:18 Just as you have sent me as your messenger to the world, so I send them as my messengers to the world.
JOH 17:19 And it is for their sakes that I am consecrating myself, so that they also may be truly consecrated.
JOH 17:20 But it is not only for them that I am interceding, but also for those who believe in me through their message,
JOH 17:21 that they all may be one – that as you, Father, are in union with us – and so the world may believe that you have sent me as your messenger.
JOH 17:22 I have given them the honour which you have given me, so that they may be one as we are one –
JOH 17:23 I in union with them and you with me – so that they may be perfected in their union, and so that the world may know that you have sent me as your messenger, and that you have loved them as you have loved me.
JOH 17:24 Father, my desire for all those whom you have given me is that they may be with me where I am, so that they may see the honour which you have given me; for you did love me before the beginning of the world.
JOH 17:25 Righteous Father, though the world did not know you, I knew you; and these people knew that you have sent me as your messenger.
JOH 17:26 I have made you known to them, and will do so still; that the love that you have had for me may be in their hearts, and that I may be in them also.’
JOH 18:1 When Jesus had said this, he went out with his disciples and crossed the Kidron ravine to a place where there was a garden, into which he and his disciples went.
JOH 18:2 The place was well known to Judas, the betrayer, for Jesus and his disciples had often met there.
JOH 18:3 So Judas, who had obtained the soldiers of the Roman garrison, and some guards from the chief priests and the Pharisees, came there with lanterns, torches, and weapons.
JOH 18:4 Jesus, aware of all that was coming upon him, went to meet them, and said to them, ‘For whom are you looking?’
JOH 18:5 ‘Jesus of Nazareth,’ was their answer. ‘I am he,’ said Jesus. (Judas, the betrayer, was also standing with them.)
JOH 18:6 When Jesus said “I am he,” they drew back and fell to the ground.
JOH 18:7 So he again asked for whom they were looking, and they answered, ‘Jesus of Nazareth.’
JOH 18:8 ‘I have already told you that I am he,’ replied Jesus, ‘so, if it is for me that you are looking, let these people go.’
JOH 18:9 This was in fulfilment of his words – “Of those whom you have given me I have not lost one.”
JOH 18:10 At this, Simon Peter, who had a sword with him, drew it, and struck the high priest’s servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant’s name was Malchus.
JOH 18:11 But Jesus said to Peter, ‘Sheathe your sword. Should I not drink the cup which the Father has given me?’
JOH 18:12 So the soldiers of the garrison, with their commanding officer and the Jewish guards, arrested Jesus and bound him,
JOH 18:13 and took him first of all to Annas. Annas was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.
JOH 18:14 It was Caiaphas who had counselled the religious authorities, that it was best that one person should die for the people.
JOH 18:15 Meanwhile Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple. That disciple, being well-known to the high priest, went with Jesus into the high priest’s courtyard,
JOH 18:16 while Peter stood outside by the door. Presently the other disciple – the one well-known to the high priest – went out and spoke to the portress, and brought Peter in.
JOH 18:17 So the maidservant said to Peter, ‘Aren’t you also one of this man’s disciples?’ ‘No, I am not,’ he said.
JOH 18:18 The servants and guards were standing round a charcoal fire (which they had made because it was cold), and were warming themselves. Peter, too, was with them, standing and warming himself.
JOH 18:19 The high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching.
JOH 18:20 ‘For my part,’ answered Jesus, ‘I have spoken to all the world openly. I always taught in some synagogue, or in the Temple Courts, places where everyone assembles, and I never spoke of anything in secret.
JOH 18:21 Why question me? Question those who have listened to me as to what I have spoken about to them. They must know what I said.’
JOH 18:22 When Jesus said this, one of the guards, who was standing near, gave him a blow with his hand. ‘Do you answer the high priest like that?’ he exclaimed.
JOH 18:23 ‘If I said anything wrong, give evidence about it,’ replied Jesus, ‘but if not, why do you strike me?’
JOH 18:24 Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.
JOH 18:25 Meanwhile Simon Peter was standing there, warming himself; so they said to him, ‘Aren’t you also one of his disciples?’ Peter denied it. ‘No, I am not,’ he said.
JOH 18:26 One of the high priest’s servants, a relation of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, exclaimed, ‘Didn’t I myself see you with him in the garden?’
JOH 18:27 Peter again denied it; and at that moment a cock crowed.
JOH 18:28 From Caiaphas they took Jesus to the Government house. It was early in the morning. But they did not enter the Government house themselves, otherwise they might become defiled, and so be unable to eat the Passover.
JOH 18:29 Therefore Pilate came outside to speak to them. ‘What charge do you bring against this man?’ he asked.
JOH 18:30 ‘If he had not been a criminal, we should not have given him up to you,’ they answered.
JOH 18:31 ‘Take him yourselves,’ said Pilate, ‘and try him by your own Law.’ ‘We have no power to put anyone to death,’ the authorities replied –
JOH 18:32 in fulfilment of what Jesus had said when indicating the death that he was destined to die.
JOH 18:33 After that, Pilate went into the Government house again, and calling Jesus up, asked him, ‘Are you the king of the Jews?’
JOH 18:34 ‘Do you ask me that yourself?’ replied Jesus, ‘or did others say it to you about me?’
JOH 18:35 ‘Do you take me for a Jew?’ was Pilate’s answer. ‘It is your own nation and the chief priests who have given you up to me. What have you done?’
JOH 18:36 ‘My kingly power,’ replied Jesus, ‘is not due to this world. If it had been so, my servants would be doing their utmost to prevent my being given up to the authorities; but my kingly power is not from the world.’
JOH 18:37 ‘So you are a king after all!’ exclaimed Pilate. ‘Yes, it is true I am a king,’ answered Jesus. ‘I was born for this, I have come into the world for this – to bear testimony to the truth. Everyone who is on the side of truth listens to my voice.’
JOH 18:38 ‘What is truth?’ exclaimed Pilate. After saying this, he went out to the crowd again, and said, ‘For my part, I find nothing with which he can be charged.
JOH 18:39 It is, however, the custom for me to grant you the release of one man at the Passover Festival. Do you wish for the release of the king of the Jews?’
JOH 18:40 ‘No, not this man,’ they shouted again, ‘but Barabbas!’ This Barabbas was a robber.
JOH 19:1 After that, Pilate had Jesus scourged.
JOH 19:2 The soldiers made a crown with some thorns and put it on his head and threw a purple robe round him.
JOH 19:3 They kept coming up to him and saying, ‘Long live the king of the Jews!’ and they gave him blow after blow with their hands.
JOH 19:4 Pilate again came outside, and said to the people, ‘Look! I am bringing him out to you, so that you may know that I find nothing with which he can be charged.’
JOH 19:5 Then Jesus came outside, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe; and Pilate said to them, ‘Here is the man!’
JOH 19:6 When the chief priests and the guards saw him, they shouted, ‘Crucify him! Crucify him!’ ‘Take him yourselves and crucify him,’ said Pilate. ‘For my part, I find nothing with which he can be charged.’
JOH 19:7 ‘But we,’ replied the crowd, ‘have a Law, under which he deserves death for making himself out to be the Son of God.’
JOH 19:8 When Pilate heard what they said, he became still more alarmed;
JOH 19:9 and, going into the Government house again, he said to Jesus, ‘Where do you come from?’
JOH 19:10 But Jesus made no reply. So Pilate said to him, ‘Do you refuse to speak to me? Don’t you know that I have power to release you, and have power to crucify you?’
JOH 19:11 ‘You would have no power over me at all,’ answered Jesus, ‘if it had not been given you from above; and, therefore, the man who betrayed me to you is guilty of the greater sin.’
JOH 19:12 This made Pilate anxious to release him; but the crowd shouted, ‘If you release that man, you are no friend of the Emperor! Anyone who makes himself out to be a king is setting himself against the Emperor!’
JOH 19:13 On hearing what they said, Pilate brought Jesus out, and took his seat on the Bench at a place called “The Stone Pavement” – in Hebrew “Gabbatha.”
JOH 19:14 It was the Passover Preparation day, and about noon. Then he said to the crowd, ‘Here is your king!’
JOH 19:15 At that the people shouted, ‘Kill him! Kill him! Crucify him!’ ‘What! Should I crucify your king?’ exclaimed Pilate. ‘We have no king but the Emperor,’ replied the chief priests;
JOH 19:16 so Pilate gave Jesus up to them to be crucified. So they took Jesus;
JOH 19:17 and he went out, carrying his cross himself, to the place which is named from a skull, or, in Hebrew, Golgotha.
JOH 19:18 There they crucified him, and two others with him – one on each side, and Jesus between them.
JOH 19:19 Pilate also had these words written and put up over the cross – “JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.”
JOH 19:20 These words were read by many people, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and they were written in Hebrew, Latin and Greek.
JOH 19:21 The chief priests said to Pilate, ‘Do not write “The king of the Jews”, but write what the man said – “I am the king of the Jews.”’
JOH 19:22 But Pilate answered, ‘What I have written, I have written.’
JOH 19:23 When the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they took his clothes and divided them into four shares – a share for each soldier – and they took the coat also. The coat had no seam, being woven in one piece from top to bottom.
JOH 19:24 So they said to one another, ‘Do not let us tear it, but let us cast lots for it, to see who will have it.’ This was in fulfilment of the words of scripture – “They shared my clothes among them, and over my clothing they cast lots.” That was what the soldiers did.
JOH 19:25 Meanwhile near the cross of Jesus were standing his mother and his mother’s sister, as well as Mary the wife of Clopas and Mary of Magdala.
JOH 19:26 When Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved, standing near, he said to his mother, ‘There is your son.’
JOH 19:27 Then he said to that disciple, ‘There is your mother.’ And from that very hour the disciple took her to live in his house.
JOH 19:28 Afterwards, knowing that everything was now finished, Jesus said, in fulfilment of the words of scripture, ‘I am thirsty.’
JOH 19:29 There was a bowl standing there full of common wine; so they put a sponge soaked in the wine on the end of a hyssop-stalk, and held it up to his mouth.
JOH 19:30 When Jesus had received the wine, he exclaimed, ‘All is finished!’ Then, bowing his head, he resigned his spirit to God.
JOH 19:31 It was the Preparation day, and so, to prevent the bodies from remaining on the crosses during the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was a great day), the Jews asked Pilate to have the legs broken and the bodies removed.
JOH 19:32 Accordingly the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first man, and then those of the other who had been crucified with Jesus;
JOH 19:33 but, on coming to him, when they saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs.
JOH 19:34 One of the soldiers, however, pierced his side with a spear, and blood and water immediately flowed from it.
JOH 19:35 This is the statement of one who actually saw it – and his statement may be relied on, and he knows that he is speaking the truth – and it is given in order that you also may be convinced.
JOH 19:36 For all this happened in fulfilment of the words of scripture – “Not one of its bones will be broken.”
JOH 19:37 And there is another passage which says – “They will look on him whom they pierced.”
JOH 19:38 After this, Joseph of Arimathea, a disciple of Jesus – but a secret one, owing to his fear of the religious authorities – begged Pilate’s permission to remove the body of Jesus. Pilate gave him leave; so Joseph went and removed the body.
JOH 19:39 Nicodemus, too – the man who had formerly visited Jesus by night – came with a roll of myrrh and aloes, weighing nearly a hundred pounds.
JOH 19:40 They took the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen with the spices, according to the Jewish mode of burial.
JOH 19:41 At the place where Jesus had been crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a newly made tomb in which no one had ever been laid.
JOH 19:42 And so, because of its being the Preparation day, and as the tomb was close at hand, they laid Jesus there.
JOH 20:1 On the first day of the week, early in the morning, while it was still dark, Mary of Magdala went to the tomb, and saw that the stone had been removed.
JOH 20:2 So she came running to Simon Peter, and to that other disciple who was Jesus’ friend, and said to them, ‘They have taken away the Master out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have laid him!’
JOH 20:3 So, Peter started off with that other disciple, and they went to the tomb.
JOH 20:4 The two began running together; but the other disciple ran faster than Peter, and reached the tomb first.
JOH 20:5 Stooping down, he saw the linen wrappings lying there, but did not go in.
JOH 20:6 Presently Simon Peter came following behind him, and went into the tomb; and he looked at the linen wrappings lying there,
JOH 20:7 and the cloth which had been on Jesus’ head, not lying with the wrappings, but rolled up on one side, separately.
JOH 20:8 Then the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, went inside too, and he saw for himself and was convinced.
JOH 20:9 For they did not then understand the passage of scripture which says that Jesus must rise again from the dead.
JOH 20:10 The disciples then returned to their companions.
JOH 20:11 Meanwhile Mary was standing close outside the tomb, weeping. Still weeping, she leant forward into the tomb,
JOH 20:12 and perceived two angels clothed in white sitting there, where the body of Jesus had been lying, one where the head and the other where the feet had been.
JOH 20:13 ‘Why are you weeping?’ asked the angels. ‘They have taken my Master away,’ she answered, ‘and I do not know where they have laid him.’
JOH 20:14 After saying this, she turned round, and looked at Jesus standing there, but she did not know that it was Jesus.
JOH 20:15 ‘Why are you weeping? Whom are you seeking?’ he asked. Supposing him to be the gardener, Mary answered, ‘If it was you, Sir, who carried him away, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away myself.’
JOH 20:16 ‘Mary!’ said Jesus. She turned round, and exclaimed in Hebrew, ‘Rabboni!’ (or, as we should say, “teacher”).
JOH 20:17 ‘Do not hold me,’ Jesus said, ‘for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to my brothers, and tell them that I am ascending to him who is my Father and their Father, my God and their God.’
JOH 20:18 Mary of Magdala went and told the disciples that she had seen the Master, and that he had said this to her.
JOH 20:19 In the evening of the same day – the first day of the week – after the doors of the room, in which the disciples were, had been shut because they were afraid of the religious authorities, Jesus came and stood among them and said, ‘Peace be with you’;
JOH 20:20 after which he showed them his hands and his side. The disciples were filled with joy when they saw the Master.
JOH 20:21 Again Jesus said to them, ‘Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me as his messenger, so I am sending you.’
JOH 20:22 After saying this, he breathed on them, and said, ‘Receive the Holy Spirit;
JOH 20:23 if you remit anyone’s sins, they have been remitted; and, if you retain them, they have been retained.’
JOH 20:24 But Thomas, one of the Twelve, called “The Twin,” was not with them when Jesus came;
JOH 20:25 so the rest of the disciples said to him, ‘We have seen the Master!’ ‘Unless I see the marks of the nails in his hands,’ he exclaimed, ‘and put my finger into the marks, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe it.’
JOH 20:26 A week later the disciples were again in the house, and Thomas was with them. After the doors had been shut, Jesus came and stood among them, and said, ‘Peace be with you.’
JOH 20:27 Then he said to Thomas, ‘Place your finger here, and look at my hands; and place your hand here, and put it into my side; and do not refuse to believe, but believe.’
JOH 20:28 And Thomas exclaimed, ‘My Master, and my God!’
JOH 20:29 ‘Is it because you have seen me that you have believed?’ said Jesus. ‘Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed!’
JOH 20:30 There were many other signs of his mission that Jesus gave in presence of the disciples, which are not recorded in this book;
JOH 20:31 but these have been recorded so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God – and that, through your belief in his name, you may have life.
JOH 21:1 Later on, Jesus showed himself again to the disciples by the Sea of Tiberias.
JOH 21:2 It was in this way, – Simon Peter, Thomas, who was called “The Twin,” Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, Zebedee’s sons, and two other disciples of Jesus, were together, when Simon Peter said,
JOH 21:3 ‘I am going fishing.’ ‘We will come with you,’ said the others. They went out and got into the boat, but caught nothing that night.
JOH 21:4 Just as day was breaking, Jesus came and stood on the beach; but the disciples did not know that it was he.
JOH 21:5 ‘My children,’ he said, ‘have you anything to eat?’ ‘No,’ they answered.
JOH 21:6 ‘Cast your net to the right of the boat,’ he said, ‘and you will find fish.’ So they cast the net, and now they could not haul it in because of the quantity of fish.
JOH 21:7 The disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, ‘It is the Master!’ When Simon Peter heard that it was the Master, he fastened his coat round him (for he had taken it off), and threw himself into the sea.
JOH 21:8 But the rest of the disciples came in the boat (for they were only about a hundred yards from shore), dragging the net full of fish.
JOH 21:9 When they had come ashore, they found a charcoal fire ready, with some fish already on it, and some bread as well.
JOH 21:10 ‘Bring some of the fish which you have just caught,’ said Jesus.
JOH 21:11 So Simon Peter got into the boat and hauled the net ashore full of large fish, a hundred and fifty-three of them; and yet, although there were so many, the net had not been torn.
JOH 21:12 ‘Come and have breakfast.’, Jesus said. None of the disciples dared ask him who he was, because they knew it was the Master.
JOH 21:13 Jesus went and took the bread and gave it to them, and the fish too.
JOH 21:14 This was the third time that Jesus showed himself to the disciples after he had risen from the dead.
JOH 21:15 When breakfast was over, Jesus said to Simon Peter, ‘Simon, son of John, do you love me more than the others?’ ‘Yes, Master,’ he answered, ‘you know that I am your friend.’ ‘Feed my lambs,’ said Jesus.
JOH 21:16 Then, a second time, Jesus asked, ‘Simon, son of John, do you love me?’ ‘Yes, Master,’ he answered, ‘you know that I am your friend.’ ‘Tend my sheep,’ said Jesus.
JOH 21:17 The third time, Jesus said to him, ‘Simon, son of John, are you my friend?’ Peter was hurt at his third question being “Are you my friend?”; and exclaimed, ‘Master, you know everything! You can tell that I am your friend.’ ‘Feed my sheep,’ said Jesus.
JOH 21:18 ‘In truth I tell you,’ he continued, ‘when you were young, you used to put on your own clothes, and walk wherever you wished; but, when you have grown old, you will have to stretch out your hands, while someone else puts on your clothes, and takes you where you do not wish.’
JOH 21:19 Jesus said this to show the death by which Peter was to honour God, and then he added, ‘Follow me.’
JOH 21:20 Peter turned round, and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following – the one who at the supper leant back on the Master’s shoulder, and asked him who it was who would betray him.
JOH 21:21 Seeing him, Peter said to Jesus, ‘Master, what about this man?’
JOH 21:22 ‘If it is my will that he should wait until I come,’ answered Jesus, ‘what has that to do with you? Follow me yourself.’
JOH 21:23 So the report spread among his followers that that disciple was not to die; yet Jesus did not say that he was not to die, but said ‘If it is my will that he should wait until I come, what has that to do with you?’
JOH 21:24 It is this disciple who states these things, and who recorded them; and we know that his statement is true.
JOH 21:25 There are many other things which Jesus did; but, if every one of them were to be recorded in detail, I suppose that even the world itself would not hold the books that would be written.
ACT 1:1 The first account which I drew up, Theophilus, dealt with all that Jesus did and taught from the very first,
ACT 1:2 down to that day on which he was taken up to heaven, after he had, by the help of the Holy Spirit, given instructions to the apostles whom he had chosen.
ACT 1:3 With abundant proofs, he showed himself to them, still living, after his death; appearing to them from time to time during forty days, and speaking of all that related to the kingdom of God.
ACT 1:4 And once, when he had gathered them together, he charged them not to leave Jerusalem, but to wait there for the fulfilment of the Father’s promise – ‘that promise,’ he said, ‘of which you have heard me speak;
ACT 1:5 for, while John baptised with water, you will be baptised with the Holy Spirit before many days have passed.’
ACT 1:6 So, when the apostles had met together, they asked Jesus this question – ‘Master, is this the time when you intend to re-establish the kingdom for Israel?’
ACT 1:7 His answer was, ‘It is not for you to know times or hours, for the Father has reserved these for his own decision;
ACT 1:8 but you will receive power, when the Holy Spirit will have descended on you, and will be witnesses for me not only in Jerusalem, but throughout Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.’
ACT 1:9 No sooner had Jesus said this than he was caught up before their eyes, and a cloud received him from their sight.
ACT 1:10 While they were still gazing up into the heavens, as he went, suddenly two men, clothed in white, stood beside them,
ACT 1:11 and said, ‘People of Galilee, why are you standing here looking up into the heavens? This same Jesus, who has been taken from you into the heavens, will come in the same way in which you have seen him go into the heavens.’
ACT 1:12 Then the apostles returned to Jerusalem from the hill called Olivet, which is about three quarters of a mile from the city.
ACT 1:13 When they reached Jerusalem, they went to the upstairs room, where they were staying. There were there Peter, John, James, and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas the son of James.
ACT 1:14 They all united in devoting themselves to prayer, and so did some women, and Mary, the mother of Jesus, and his brothers.
ACT 1:15 About this time, at a meeting of the Lord’s followers, when there were about a hundred and twenty present, Peter rose to speak.
ACT 1:16 ‘Friends,’ he said, ‘it was necessary that the prediction of scripture should be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit made by the lips of David about Judas, who acted as guide to the men who arrested Jesus,
ACT 1:17 for he was one of our number and had his part allotted him in this work of ours.’
ACT 1:18 (This man had bought a piece of land with the price of his treachery; and, falling heavily, his body had burst open, and all his bowels protruded.
ACT 1:19 This became known to everyone living in Jerusalem, so that the field came to be called, in their language, “Akeldama,” which means the “Field of Blood.”)
ACT 1:20 ‘For in the book of Psalms,’ Peter continued, ‘it is said – “Let his home become desolate, and let no one live in it”; and also – “His office let another take.”
ACT 1:21 Therefore, from among the men who have been with us all the time that Jesus, our Master, went in and out among us –
ACT 1:22 from his baptism by John down to that day on which he was taken from us – someone must be found to join us as a witness of his resurrection.’
ACT 1:23 So they put forward two men, Joseph called Barsabbas, whose other name was Justus, and Matthias;
ACT 1:24 and they offered this prayer – ‘Lord, who reads all hearts, show which of these two men you have chosen
ACT 1:25 to take the place in this apostolic work, which Judas has abandoned, to go to his proper place.’
ACT 1:26 Then they drew lots between them; and, the lot having fallen to Matthias, he was added to the number of the eleven apostles.
ACT 2:1 In the course of the Festival at the close of the Harvest the disciples had all met together,
ACT 2:2 when suddenly there came from the heavens a noise like a strong wind rushing by; it filled the whole house in which they were sitting.
ACT 2:3 Then there appeared tongues of what seemed to be flame, separating, so that one settled on each of them;
ACT 2:4 and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak in different languages as the Spirit prompted their utterances.
ACT 2:5 Now there were then staying in Jerusalem religious Jews from every country in the world;
ACT 2:6 and, when this sound was heard, numbers of people collected, in the greatest excitement, because each of them heard the disciples speaking in his own language.
ACT 2:7 They were utterly amazed, and kept asking in astonishment, ‘What! Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans?
ACT 2:8 Then how is it that we each of us hear them in our own language?
ACT 2:9 Some of us are Parthians, some Medes, some Elamites; and some of us live in Mesopotamia, in Judea and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Roman Asia,
ACT 2:10 in Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and the districts of Libya adjoining Cyrene; some of us are visitors from Rome,
ACT 2:11 either Jews by birth or converts, and some are Cretans and Arabians – yet we all alike hear them speaking in our own languages of the great things that God has done.’
ACT 2:12 They were all utterly amazed and bewildered. ‘What does it mean?’ they asked one another.
ACT 2:13 But there were some who said with a sneer, ‘They have had too much new wine.’
ACT 2:14 Then Peter, surrounded by the eleven other apostles, stood up, and, raising his voice, addressed the crowd. ‘People of Judea,’ he began, ‘and all you who are staying in Jerusalem, let me tell you what this means. Mark well my words.
ACT 2:15 These people are not drunk, as you suppose; for it is only now nine in the morning! No!
ACT 2:16 This is what is spoken of in the prophet Joel –
ACT 2:17 “It will come about in the last days,” God says, “That I will pour out my Spirit on all humanity; your sons and your daughters will become prophets, your young men will see visions, and your old men dream dreams;
ACT 2:18 yes, even on the slaves – for they are mine – both men and women, I will in those days pour out my Spirit, and they will become prophets;
ACT 2:19 and I will show wonders in the heavens above, and signs on the earth below – blood and fire and mist of smoke;
ACT 2:20 the sun will become darkness, and the moon blood-red, before the day of the Lord comes – that great and awful day.
ACT 2:21 Then will everyone who invokes the name of the Lord be saved.”
ACT 2:22 People of Israel, listen to what I am saying. Jesus of Nazareth, a man whose mission from God to you was proved by miracles, wonders, and signs, which God showed among you through him, as you know full well –
ACT 2:23 he, I say, in accordance with God’s definite plan and with his previous knowledge, was betrayed, and you, by the hands of lawless men, nailed him to a cross and put him to death.
ACT 2:24 But God released him from the pangs of death and raised him to life, it being impossible for death to retain its hold on him.
ACT 2:25 Indeed he was the one David was referring to when he said – “I have had the Lord ever before my eyes, for he stands at my right hand, so that I should not be disquieted.
ACT 2:26 Therefore my heart was cheered, and my tongue told its delight; yes, even my body, too, will rest in hope;
ACT 2:27 For you will not abandon my soul to Hades, nor surrender me, your holy one, to undergo corruption.
ACT 2:28 You have shown me the path to life, you will fill me with gladness in your presence.”
ACT 2:29 Friends, I can speak to you the more confidently about the patriarch David, because he is dead and buried, and his tomb is here among us to this very day.
ACT 2:30 David, then, prophet as he was, knowing that God had solemnly sworn to him to set one of his descendants on his throne, looked into the future,
ACT 2:31 and referred to the resurrection of the Christ when he said that he had not been abandoned to Hades, nor had his body undergone corruption.
ACT 2:32 It was this Jesus, whom God raised to life; and of that we are ourselves all witnesses.
ACT 2:33 And now that he has been exalted to the right hand of God, and has received from the Father the promised gift of the Holy Spirit, he has begun to pour out that gift, as you yourselves now see and hear.
ACT 2:34 It was not David who went up into heaven; for he himself says – “The Lord said to my master, ‘Sit on my right hand,
ACT 2:35 Until I put your enemies as a footstool under your feet.’”
ACT 2:36 So let the whole nation of Israel know beyond all doubt, that God has made him both Lord and Christ – this Jesus whom you crucified.’
ACT 2:37 When the people heard this, they were conscience-smitten, and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, ‘Friends, what can we do?’
ACT 2:38 ‘Repent,’ answered Peter, ‘and be baptised every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins; and then you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
ACT 2:39 For the promise is for you and for your children, and also for all those now far away, who may be called by the Lord our God.’
ACT 2:40 Peter spoke to them for a long time using many other arguments and pleaded with them – ‘Save yourselves from the perverse spirit of this age.’
ACT 2:41 So those who accepted his teaching were baptised, and about three thousand people joined the disciples on that day alone.
ACT 2:42 They devoted themselves to the teaching of the apostles and to the Common life of the church, to the breaking of the bread and to the Prayers.
ACT 2:43 A deep impression was made on everyone, and many wonders and signs were done at the hands of the apostles.
ACT 2:44 All who became believers in Christ held everything for the common use;
ACT 2:45 they sold their property and their goods, and shared the proceeds among them all, according to their individual needs.
ACT 2:46 Every day they devoted themselves to meeting together in the Temple Courts, and to the breaking of bread at their homes, while they partook of their food in simple-hearted gladness, praising God, and winning the goodwill of all the people.
ACT 2:47 And the Lord daily added to their company those who were in the path of salvation.
ACT 3:1 One day, as Peter and John were going up into the Temple Courts for the three o’clock Prayers,
ACT 3:2 a man, who had been lame from his birth, was being carried by. This man used to be set down every day at the gate of the Temple called “the Beautiful Gate,” to beg of those who went in.
ACT 3:3 Seeing Peter and John on the point of entering, he asked them to give him something.
ACT 3:4 Peter fixed his eyes on him, and so did John, and then Peter said, ‘Look at us.’
ACT 3:5 The man was all attention, expecting to get something from them;
ACT 3:6 but Peter added, ‘I have no gold or silver, but I give you what I have. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, get up and walk.’
ACT 3:7 Grasping the lame man by the right hand, Peter lifted him up. Instantly the man’s feet and ankles became strong,
ACT 3:8 and, leaping up, he stood and began to walk about, and then went with them into the Temple Courts, walking, and leaping, and praising God.
ACT 3:9 All the people saw him walking about and praising God;
ACT 3:10 and, when they recognised him as the man who used to sit begging at the Beautiful Gate of the Temple, they were utterly astonished and amazed at what had happened to him.
ACT 3:11 While the man still clung to Peter and John, the people all quickly gathered round them in the Colonnade named after Solomon, in the greatest astonishment.
ACT 3:12 On seeing this, Peter said to the people, ‘People of Israel, why are you surprised at this? And why do you stare at us, as though we, by any power or piety of our own, had enabled this man to walk?
ACT 3:13 The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our ancestors, has done honour to his servant Jesus – him whom you gave up and disowned before Pilate, when he had decided to set him free.
ACT 3:14 You, I say, disowned the holy and righteous one, and asked for the release of a murderer!
ACT 3:15 The guide to life you put to death! But God raised him from the dead – and of that we are ourselves witnesses.
ACT 3:16 And it is by faith in the name of Jesus, that this man, whom you all see and know, has – by his name – been made strong. Yes, it is the faith inspired by Jesus that has made this complete cure of the man, before the eyes of you all.
ACT 3:17 And yet, my friends, I know that you acted as you did from ignorance, and your rulers also.
ACT 3:18 But it was in this way that God fulfilled all that he had long ago foretold, as to the sufferings of his Christ, by the lips of all the prophets.
ACT 3:19 Therefore, repent and turn so that your sins may be wiped away; so that happier times may come from the Lord himself,
ACT 3:20 and so that he may send you, in Jesus, your long-appointed Christ.
ACT 3:21 But heaven must be his home, until the days of the Universal Restoration, of which God has spoken by the lips of his holy prophets from the very first.
ACT 3:22 Moses himself said – “The Lord your God will raise up from among yourselves a prophet, as he raised me. To him you will listen whenever he speaks to you.
ACT 3:23 And it will be that should anyone among the people not listen to that prophet, he will be utterly destroyed.”
ACT 3:24 Yes, and all the prophets from Samuel onwards, and all their successors who had a message to deliver, told of these days.
ACT 3:25 You yourselves are the heirs of the prophets, and heirs, too, of the covenant which God made with your ancestors, when he said to Abraham – “In your descendants will all the nations of the earth be blessed.”
ACT 3:26 For you, first, God raised up his servant, and sent him to bless you, by turning each one of you from his wicked ways.’
ACT 4:1 While Peter and John were still speaking to the people, the chief priest, with the officer in charge at the Temple and the Sadducees, came up to them,
ACT 4:2 much annoyed because they were teaching the people, and because, through Jesus, they were preaching the resurrection from the dead.
ACT 4:3 They arrested the apostles and, as it was already evening, had them placed in custody until the next day.
ACT 4:4 Many, however, of those who had heard the apostles’ message became believers in Christ, the number of the men alone amounting to about five thousand.
ACT 4:5 The next day, a meeting of the leaders of the people, the elders, and the teachers of the Law was held in Jerusalem.
ACT 4:6 There were present Annas the high priest, Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and all who were of High-Priestly rank.
ACT 4:7 They had Peter and John brought before them, and questioned them. ‘By what power,’ they asked, ‘Or in whose name have men like you done this thing?’
ACT 4:8 Then, Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said, ‘Leaders of the people and elders,
ACT 4:9 since we are on our trial today for a kind act done to a helpless man, and are asked in what way the man here before you has been cured,
ACT 4:10 let me tell you all and all the people of Israel, that it is by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified and whom God raised from the dead – it is, I say, by his name that this man stands here before you lame no longer.
ACT 4:11 Jesus is “the stone which, scorned by you the builders, has yet become the corner stone.”
ACT 4:12 And salvation is in him alone; for there is no other name in the whole world, given to people, to which we must look for our salvation.’
ACT 4:13 When the Council saw how boldly Peter and John spoke, and found that they were uneducated men of humble station, they were surprised, and realised that they had been companions of Jesus.
ACT 4:14 But, when they looked at the man who had been healed, standing there with them, they had nothing to say.
ACT 4:15 So they ordered them out of court, and then began consulting together.
ACT 4:16 ‘What are we to do to these men?’ they asked one another. ‘That a remarkable sign has been given through them is obvious to everyone living in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it.
ACT 4:17 But, to prevent this thing from spreading further among the people, let us warn them not to speak in this name any more to anyone whatever.’
ACT 4:18 So they called the apostles in, and ordered them not to speak or teach in the name of Jesus.
ACT 4:19 But Peter and John replied, ‘Whether it is right, in the sight of God, to listen to you rather than to him – judge for yourselves,
ACT 4:20 for we cannot help speaking of what we have seen and heard.’
ACT 4:21 However, after further warnings, the Council set them at liberty, not seeing any safe way of punishing them, because of the people, for they were all praising God for what had occurred;
ACT 4:22 for the man who was the subject of this miraculous cure was more than forty years old.
ACT 4:23 After they had been set at liberty, the apostles went to their friends and told them what the chief priests and the elders had said to them.
ACT 4:24 All who heard their story, moved by a common impulse, raised their voices to God in prayer: ‘Sovereign Lord, it is you who has made the heavens, the earth, the sea, and everything that is in them,
ACT 4:25 and who, by the lips of our ancestor, your servant David, who spoke under the influence of the Holy Spirit, have said – “Why did the nations rage, and the peoples form vain designs?
ACT 4:26 The kings of the earth set their array, and its rulers gathered together, against the Lord and against his Christ.”
ACT 4:27 There have indeed gathered together in this city against your holy servant Jesus, whom you has consecrated the Christ, not Herod and Pontius Pilate only, but the nations and the people of Israel besides –
ACT 4:28 yet only to do what you, by your power and of your own will, did long ago destine to be done.
ACT 4:29 Now, therefore, Lord, mark their threats, and enable your servants, with all fearlessness, to tell your message,
ACT 4:30 while you stretch out your hand to heal, and cause signs and wonders to take place through the name of your holy servant Jesus.’
ACT 4:31 When their prayer was ended, the place in which they were assembled was shaken; and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to tell God’s message fearlessly.
ACT 4:32 The whole body of those who had become believers in Christ were of one heart and mind. Not one of them claimed any of his goods as his own, but everything was held for the common use.
ACT 4:33 The apostles continued with great power to bear their testimony to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and God’s blessing rested on them all abundantly.
ACT 4:34 Nor was there anyone in need among them, for all who were owners of land or houses sold them, and brought the proceeds of the sales
ACT 4:35 and laid them at the apostles’ feet; and then everyone received a share in proportion to his wants.
ACT 4:36 A Levite of Cyprian birth, named Joseph, (who had received from the apostles the additional name of “Barnabas” – which means “The Consoler,”)
ACT 4:37 Sold a farm that belonged to him, and brought the money and laid it at the apostles’ feet.
ACT 5:1 There was, however, a man named Ananias, who, with his wife Sapphira, sold some property,
ACT 5:2 and, with her connivance, kept back some of the proceeds. He brought only a part and laid it at the apostles’ feet.
ACT 5:3 ‘Ananias,’ Peter exclaimed, ‘how is it that Satan has so taken possession of your heart that you have lied to the Holy Spirit, and kept back a part of the money paid for the land?
ACT 5:4 While it was unsold, was not it your own? And after it was sold, was not the money at your own disposal? How did you come to think of such a thing? You have lied, not to people, but to God!’
ACT 5:5 As Ananias heard these words, he fell down and expired; and everyone who heard of it was appalled.
ACT 5:6 The young men got up, and, winding the body in a sheet, carried it out and buried it.
ACT 5:7 After an interval of about three hours his wife came in, not knowing what had happened.
ACT 5:8 ‘Is it true,’ Peter asked, addressing her, ‘that you sold your land for such a sum?’ ‘Yes,’ she answered, ‘we did.’
ACT 5:9 Then Peter said, ‘How did you come to agree to provoke the Spirit of the Lord? Listen! The footsteps of those who have buried your husband are at the door; and they will carry you out too.’
ACT 5:10 Instantly Sapphira fell down at Peter’s feet and expired. On coming in, the young men found her dead; so they carried her out and buried her by her husband’s side.
ACT 5:11 The whole church and all who heard of these events were appalled.
ACT 5:12 Many signs and wonders continued to occur among the people, through the instrumentality of the apostles, whose custom it was to meet all together in the Colonnade of Solomon;
ACT 5:13 but of the rest no one ventured to join them. On the other hand, the people were full of their praise,
ACT 5:14 and still larger numbers, both of men and women, as they became believers in the Lord, were added to their number.
ACT 5:15 The consequence was that people would bring out their sick even into the streets, and lay them on mattresses and mats, in the hope that, as Peter came by, at least his shadow might fall on someone of them.
ACT 5:16 Besides this, the inhabitants of the towns round Jerusalem flocked into the city, bringing with them their sick and those who were troubled by foul spirits; and they were cured everyone.
ACT 5:17 At this the high priest was roused to action, and he and all his supporters (who formed the party of the Sadducees), moved by jealousy,
ACT 5:18 arrested the apostles, and had them placed in custody.
ACT 5:19 An angel of the Lord, however, opened the prison doors at night and led them out.
ACT 5:20 ‘Go,’ he said, ‘and stand in the Temple Courts, and tell the people the whole message of this new life.’
ACT 5:21 When they heard this, they went at daybreak into the Temple Courts, and began to teach. The high priest and his party, on their arrival, summoned the High Council, including all the leaders of the people among the Israelites, and sent to the jail to fetch the apostles.
ACT 5:22 But, when the officers got there, they did not find them in the prison; so they returned and reported that,
ACT 5:23 while they had found the jail barred securely and the guards posted at the doors, yet, on opening them, they had not found anyone inside.
ACT 5:24 When the officer in charge at the Temple and the chief priests heard their story, they were perplexed about the apostles and as to what all this would lead to.
ACT 5:25 Presently, however, someone came and told them, that the men whom they had put in prison were actually standing in the Temple Courts, teaching the people.
ACT 5:26 Then, the officer went with his men and fetched the apostles – without using violence, for they were afraid of being stoned by the people –
ACT 5:27 and then brought them before the Council. The high priest demanded an explanation from them.
ACT 5:28 ‘We gave you strict orders,’ he said, ‘not to teach in this name. Yet you have actually flooded Jerusalem with your teaching, and you want to make us responsible for the death of this man.’
ACT 5:29 To this Peter and the apostles replied, ‘We must obey God rather than people.
ACT 5:30 The God of our ancestors raised Jesus, whom you put to death by hanging him on a cross.
ACT 5:31 It is this Jesus whom God has exalted to his right hand, to be a guide and a Saviour, to give Israel repentance and forgiveness of sins.
ACT 5:32 And we are witness to the truth of this, and so is the Holy Spirit – the gift of God to those who obey him.’
ACT 5:33 The members of the Council became frantic with rage on hearing this, and were for putting the apostles to death.
ACT 5:34 But Gamaliel, a Pharisee, who was a Doctor of the Law and who was held in universal respect, rose in the Council, and directed that the men should be taken out of court for a little while.
ACT 5:35 He then said, ‘People of Israel, take care as to what you intend to do with these men.
ACT 5:36 For not long ago Theudas appeared, professing to be somebody, and was joined by a body of some four hundred men. But he was killed; and all his followers scattered and dwindled away.
ACT 5:37 After him, Judas the Galilean appeared at the time of the census, and induced people to follow him; yet he, too, perished and all his followers were dispersed.
ACT 5:38 And, in this present case, my advice to you is not to interfere with these men, but to leave them alone, for, if their designs and their work are merely of human origin, they will come to an end;
ACT 5:39 but, if they are of divine origin, you will be powerless to put an end to them – or else you may find yourselves fighting against God!’
ACT 5:40 The Council followed his advice, and, calling the apostles in, had them flogged, and then, after cautioning them not to speak in the name of Jesus, set them free.
ACT 5:41 But the apostles left the Council, rejoicing that they had been thought worthy to suffer disgrace for that name;
ACT 5:42 and never for a single day, either in the Temple Courts or in private houses, did they cease to teach, or to tell the good news of Jesus, the Christ.
ACT 6:1 About this time, when the number of the disciples was constantly increasing, complaints were made by the Greek speaking Jews against the Aramaic speaking Jews, that their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution.
ACT 6:2 The Twelve, therefore, called together the general body of the disciples and said to them, ‘It is not well for us to see to the distribution at the tables and neglect God’s message.
ACT 6:3 Therefore, friends, look for seven men of reputation among yourselves, wise and spiritually-minded men, and we will appoint them to attend to this matter;
ACT 6:4 while we, for our part, will devote ourselves to prayer, and to the delivery of the message.’
ACT 6:5 This proposal was unanimously agreed to; and the disciples chose Stephen – a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit – and Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicholas of Antioch, a former convert to Judaism;
ACT 6:6 and they brought these men to the apostles, who, after praying, placed their hands on them.
ACT 6:7 So God’s message spread, and the number of the disciples continued to increase rapidly in Jerusalem, and a large body of the priests accepted the faith.
ACT 6:8 Meanwhile Stephen, divinely helped and strengthened, was showing great wonders and signs among the people.
ACT 6:9 But some members of the Synagogue of the Freed Slaves (as it was called), Cyrenians, Alexandrians, and Visitors from Cilicia and Roman Asia, were roused to action and began disputing with Stephen;
ACT 6:10 yet they were quite unable to withstand the wisdom and the inspiration with which he spoke.
ACT 6:11 Then they induced some men to assert that they had heard Stephen saying blasphemous things against Moses, and against God;
ACT 6:12 and they stirred up the people, as well as the elders and the teachers of the Law, and set on Stephen, and arrested him, and brought him before the High Council.
ACT 6:13 There they produced witnesses who gave false evidence. ‘This man,’ they said, ‘is incessantly saying things against this holy place and the Law;
ACT 6:14 indeed, we have heard him declare that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place, and change the customs handed down to us by Moses.’
ACT 6:15 The eyes of all the members of the Council were riveted on Stephen, and they saw his face looking like the face of an angel.
ACT 7:1 Then the high priest asked, ‘Is this true?’
ACT 7:2 Stephen replied, ‘Brothers and fathers, hear what I have to say. God, who manifests himself in the glory, appeared to our ancestor Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, and before he settled in Haran, and said to him –
ACT 7:3 “Leave your country and your people, and come into the country that I will show you.”
ACT 7:4 And so Abraham left the country of the Chaldaeans and settled in Haran; and from there, after his father’s death, God caused him to migrate into this country, in which you are now living.
ACT 7:5 God did not at that time give him any part of it, not even a foot of ground. But he promised to give him possession of it and his descendants after him, though at that time he had no child.
ACT 7:6 God’s words were these – “Abraham’s descendants will live in a foreign country, where they will be enslaved and ill-treated for four hundred years.
ACT 7:7 But I myself will judge the nation, to which they will be enslaved,” God said, “and after that they will leave the country and worship me in this place.”
ACT 7:8 Then God made with Abraham the covenant of circumcision; and under it Abraham became the father of Isaac, and circumcised him when he was eight days old; and Isaac became the father of Jacob; and Jacob of the Twelve Patriarchs.
ACT 7:9 The Patriarchs, out of jealousy, sold Joseph into slavery in Egypt; but God was with him,
ACT 7:10 and delivered him out of all his troubles, and enabled him to win favour and show wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who appointed him Governor of Egypt and of his whole household.
ACT 7:11 Then a famine spread over the whole of Egypt and Canaan, causing great distress, and our ancestors could find no food.
ACT 7:12 Hearing, however, that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob sent our ancestors there on their first visit.
ACT 7:13 In the course of their second visit, Joseph revealed himself to his brothers, and his family became known to Pharaoh.
ACT 7:14 Then Joseph sent an urgent invitation to his father Jacob and to his relatives, seventy-five persons in all;
ACT 7:15 and so Jacob went down into Egypt. There he died, and our ancestors also,
ACT 7:16 and their bodies were removed to Shechem, and laid in the tomb which Abraham had bought for a sum of money from the sons of Hamor in Shechem.
ACT 7:17 As the time drew near for the fulfilment of the promise which God had made to Abraham, the people increased largely in numbers in Egypt,
ACT 7:18 until a new king, who knew nothing of Joseph, came to the throne.
ACT 7:19 This king acted deceitfully towards our people and ill-treated our ancestors, making them abandon their own infants, so that they should not be reared.
ACT 7:20 It was just at this time that Moses was born. He was an exceedingly beautiful child, and for three months was brought up in his own father’s house;
ACT 7:21 and, when he was abandoned, the daughter of Pharaoh found him and brought him up as her own son.
ACT 7:22 So Moses was educated in all the learning of the Egyptians, and proved his ability both by his words and actions.
ACT 7:23 When he was in his fortieth year, he resolved to visit his fellow Israelites;
ACT 7:24 and, seeing an Israelite ill-treated, he defended him, and avenged the man, who was being wronged, by striking down the Egyptian.
ACT 7:25 He thought his own people would understand that God was using him to save them; but they failed to do so.
ACT 7:26 The next day he again appeared on the scene, when some of them were fighting, and tried to make peace between them. “Men,” he said, “you are brothers; how is it that you are ill-treating one another?”
ACT 7:27 But the man who was ill-treating his fellow workman pushed Moses aside saying – “Who made you a ruler and judge over us?
ACT 7:28 Do you mean to make away with me as you did yesterday with that Egyptian?”
ACT 7:29 At these words Moses took to flight, and became an exile in Midian; and there he had two sons born to him.
ACT 7:30 Forty years had passed when there appeared to him, in the desert of Mount Sinai, an angel in a flame of fire in a bush.
ACT 7:31 When Moses saw it, he was astonished at the vision; but on his going nearer to look at it more closely, the voice of the Lord was heard to say –
ACT 7:32 “I am the God of your ancestors, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.” Moses trembled, and did not dare to look.
ACT 7:33 Then the Lord said to him – “Take your sandals off your feet, for the spot where you are standing is holy ground.
ACT 7:34 I have seen the oppression of my people who are in Egypt, and heard their groans, and I have come down to deliver them. Come now and I will send you into Egypt.”
ACT 7:35 This same Moses, whom they had disowned with the words – “Who made you a ruler and a judge?” was the man whom God sent to be both a ruler and a deliverer, under the guidance of the angel that had appeared to him in the bush.
ACT 7:36 He it was who led them out, after he had shown wonders and signs in Egypt, in the Red Sea, and in the desert during forty years.
ACT 7:37 This was the Moses who said to the people of Israel – “God will raise up for you, from among yourselves, a prophet, as he raised up me.”
ACT 7:38 He, too, it was who was present at the assembly in the desert, with the angel who talked to him on Mount Sinai, and with our ancestors, and who received living truths to impart to you.
ACT 7:39 Yet our ancestors refused him obedience; more than that, they rejected him, and in their hearts turned back to Egypt,
ACT 7:40 while they said to Aaron – “Make us Gods who will lead the way for us, since, as for this Moses who has brought us out of Egypt, we do not know what has become of him.”
ACT 7:41 That was the time when they made the calf and offered sacrifice to their idol, and held festivities in honour of their own handiwork!
ACT 7:42 So God turned from them and left them to the worship of the Starry Host, as is written in the book of the prophets – “Did you offer victims and sacrifices to me, house of Israel, all those forty years in the desert?
ACT 7:43 You took with you the tent where Moloch is worshipped and the star of the god Rephan – the images which you had made to worship. Therefore I will exile you beyond Babylon.”
ACT 7:44 Our ancestors had the tent where they worshipped God in the desert, constructed, just as he who spoke to Moses had directed him to make it, after the model which he had seen.
ACT 7:45 This tent, which was handed down to them, was brought into this country by our ancestors who accompanied Joshua (at the conquest of the nations that God drove out before their advance), and remained here until the time of David.
ACT 7:46 David found favour with God, and prayed that he might provide the God of Jacob with a place to reside.
ACT 7:47 But it was Solomon who built a house for God.
ACT 7:48 Yet it is not in buildings made by hands that the Most High dwells. As the prophet says –
ACT 7:49 “The heavens are a throne for me, and the earth a stool for my feet. What manner of house will you build me, asks the Lord, or what place is there where I may rest?
ACT 7:50 Was it not my hand that made all these things?”
ACT 7:51 Stubborn people, heathen in heart and ears, you are for ever resisting the Holy Spirit; your ancestors did it, and you are doing it still.
ACT 7:52 Which of the prophets escaped persecution at their hands? They killed those who foretold the coming of the righteous one; of whom you, in your turn, have now become the betrayers and murderers –
ACT 7:53 you who received the Law as transmitted by angels and yet failed to keep it.’
ACT 7:54 As they listened to this, the Council grew frantic with rage, and gnashed their teeth at Stephen.
ACT 7:55 He, filled as he was with the Holy Spirit, fixed his eyes intently on the heavens, and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at God’s right hand.
ACT 7:56 ‘Look,’ he exclaimed, ‘I see heaven open and the Son of Man standing at God’s right hand!’
ACT 7:57 At this, with a loud shout, they stopped their ears and all rushed on him, forced him outside the city,
ACT 7:58 and began to stone him, the witnesses laying their clothes at the feet of a young man named Saul.
ACT 7:59 And they stoned Stephen, while he cried to the Lord, ‘Lord Jesus! Receive my spirit!’
ACT 7:60 Falling on his knees, he called out loudly, ‘Lord! Do not charge them with this sin;’ and with these words he fell asleep.
ACT 8:1 Saul approved of his being put to death. On that very day a great persecution broke out against the church which was in Jerusalem; and its members, with the exception of the apostles, were all scattered over the districts of Judea and Samaria.
ACT 8:2 Some religious men buried Stephen, with loud lamentations for him.
ACT 8:3 But Saul began to devastate the church; he entered house after house, dragged out men and women alike, and threw them into prison.
ACT 8:4 Now those who were scattered in different directions went from place to place proclaiming the good news.
ACT 8:5 Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and there began to preach the Christ.
ACT 8:6 The people, one and all, listened attentively to what Philip told them, when they heard of, and saw, the miracles which he was working.
ACT 8:7 For there were many instances of people with foul spirits, where the spirits, with loud screams, came out of them; and many who were paralysed or lame were cured,
ACT 8:8 so that there was great rejoicing throughout that city.
ACT 8:9 There was staying in the city a man named Simon, who had been practicing magic there and mystifying the Samaritan people, giving himself out to be some great being.
ACT 8:10 Everyone, high and low, paid attention to him. “This man,” they used to say, “must be that power of God which people call ‘The Great Power.’”
ACT 8:11 And they paid attention to him because they had for a long time been mystified by his magic arts.
ACT 8:12 However, when they came to believe Philip, as he told them the good news about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptised, both men and women.
ACT 8:13 Even Simon believed, and after his baptism attached himself to Philip, and was in his turn mystified at seeing signs and great miracles constantly occurring.
ACT 8:14 When the apostles at Jerusalem heard that the Samaritans had welcomed God’s message, they sent Peter and John to them;
ACT 8:15 and they, on their arrival, prayed that the Samaritans might receive the Holy Spirit.
ACT 8:16 (As yet the Spirit had not descended on any of them; they had only been baptised in the name of the Lord Jesus).
ACT 8:17 Then Peter and John placed their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit.
ACT 8:18 When Simon saw that it was through the placing of the apostles’ hands on them that the Spirit was given, he brought them a sum of money and said,
ACT 8:19 ‘Give me also this power of yours, so that, if I place my hands on anyone, he may receive the Holy Spirit.’
ACT 8:20 ‘A curse on you and on your silver,’ Peter exclaimed, ‘for thinking that God’s free gift can be bought with money!
ACT 8:21 You have no share or part in our message, for your heart is not right with God.
ACT 8:22 Therefore repent of this wickedness of yours, and pray to the Lord, that, if possible, you may be forgiven for such a thought;
ACT 8:23 for I see that you have fallen into the bitterness of envy and the fetters of sin.’
ACT 8:24 ‘Pray to the Lord for me, all of you,’ Simon answered, ‘so that none of the things you have spoken of may happen to me.’
ACT 8:25 Peter and John, having borne their testimony and delivered the Lord’s message, returned to Jerusalem, telling the good news, as they went, in many Samaritan villages.
ACT 8:26 Meanwhile an angel of the Lord had said to Philip, ‘Set out on a journey southwards, along the road that runs down from Jerusalem to Gaza.’ (It is now deserted).
ACT 8:27 So Philip set out on a journey; and on his way he came on an official of high rank, in the service of Candace, Queen of the Abyssinians. He was her treasurer, and had been to Jerusalem to worship,
ACT 8:28 and was now on his way home, sitting in his carriage and reading the prophet Isaiah.
ACT 8:29 The Spirit said to Philip, ‘Go up to the carriage over there and keep close to it.’
ACT 8:30 So Philip ran up, and he heard the Abyssinian reading the prophet Isaiah. ‘Do you understand what you are reading?’ he asked.
ACT 8:31 ‘How can I,’ the other answered, ‘unless someone will explain it to me?’ and he invited Philip to get up and sit by his side.
ACT 8:32 The passage of scripture which he was reading was this – “Like a sheep, he was led away to slaughter, and as a lamb is dumb in the hands of its shearer, so he refrains from opening his lips.
ACT 8:33 He was humiliated and justice was denied him. Who will tell the story of his generation? For his life is cut off from earth.”
ACT 8:34 ‘Now,’ said the Treasurer, addressing Philip, ‘tell me, of whom is the prophet speaking? Of himself, or of someone else?’
ACT 8:35 Then Philip began, and, taking this passage as his text, told him the good news about Jesus.
ACT 8:36 Presently, as they were going along the road, they came to some water, and the Treasurer exclaimed, ‘Look! Here is water; what is to prevent my being baptised?’
ACT 8:37 
ACT 8:38 So he ordered the carriage to stop, and they went down into the water – both Philip and the Treasurer – and Philip baptised him.
ACT 8:39 But, when they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught Philip away, and the Treasurer saw no more of him; for he continued his journey with a joyful heart.
ACT 8:40 But Philip was found at Ashdod, and, as he went on his way, he told the good news in all the towns through which he passed, until he came to Caesarea.
ACT 9:1 Meanwhile Saul, still breathing murderous threats against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest,
ACT 9:2 and asked him to give him letters to the Jewish congregations at Damascus, authorising him, if he found there any supporters of the Way, whether men or women, to have them put in chains and brought to Jerusalem.
ACT 9:3 While on his journey, as he was nearing Damascus, suddenly a light from the heavens flashed around him.
ACT 9:4 He fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to him – ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?’
ACT 9:5 ‘Who are you, Lord?’ he asked. ‘I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting,’ the voice answered;
ACT 9:6 ‘Yet stand up and go into the city, and you will be told what you must do.’
ACT 9:7 The men traveling with Saul were meanwhile standing speechless; they heard the sound of the voice, but saw no one.
ACT 9:8 When Saul got up from the ground, though his eyes were open, he could see nothing. So his men led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus;
ACT 9:9 and for three days he was unable to see, and took nothing either to eat or to drink.
ACT 9:10 Now there was at Damascus a disciple named Ananias, to whom, in a vision, the Lord said, ‘Ananias.’ ‘Yes, Lord,’ he answered.
ACT 9:11 ‘Go at once,’ said the Lord, ‘to the Straight Street, and ask at Judas’s house for a man named Saul, from Tarsus. He is at this moment praying,
ACT 9:12 and he has seen, in a vision, a man named Ananias coming in and placing his hands on him, so that he may recover his sight.’
ACT 9:13 ‘Lord,’ exclaimed Ananias, ‘I have heard from many people about this man – how much harm he has done at Jerusalem to your people there.
ACT 9:14 And, here, too, he holds authority from the chief priests to put in chains all those who invoke your name.’
ACT 9:15 But the Lord said to him, ‘Go, for this man is my chosen instrument to uphold my name before the Gentiles and their kings, and the people of Israel.
ACT 9:16 I will myself show him all that he has to suffer for my name.’
ACT 9:17 So Ananias went, entered the house, and, placing his hands on Saul, said, ‘Saul, my brother, I have been sent by the Lord – by Jesus, who appeared to you on your way here – so that you may recover your sight and be filled with the Holy Spirit.’
ACT 9:18 Instantly it seemed as if a film fell from Saul’s eyes, and his sight was restored. Then he got up and was baptised,
ACT 9:19 and, after he had taken food, he felt his strength return. Saul stayed for some days with the disciples who were at Damascus,
ACT 9:20 and at once began in the synagogues to proclaim Jesus as the Son of God.
ACT 9:21 All who heard him were amazed. ‘Is not this,’ they asked, ‘the man who worked havoc in Jerusalem among those that invoke this name, and who had also come here for the express purpose of having such persons put in chains and taken before the chief priests?’
ACT 9:22 Saul’s influence, however, kept steadily increasing, and he confounded the Jewish people who lived in Damascus by the proofs that he gave that Jesus was the Christ.
ACT 9:23 After some time some of them laid a plot to kill Saul,
ACT 9:24 but it became known to him. They even watched the gates day and night, to kill him;
ACT 9:25 but his disciples let him down by night through an opening in the wall, lowering him in a basket.
ACT 9:26 On his arrival in Jerusalem, Saul attempted to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, as they did not believe that he was really a disciple.
ACT 9:27 Barnabas, however, taking him by the hand, brought him to the apostles, and told them the whole story of how Saul on his journey had seen the Lord, and how the Lord had talked to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken out fearlessly in the name of Jesus.
ACT 9:28 After that, Saul remained in Jerusalem, in close contact with the apostles; and he spoke fearlessly in the name of the Lord,
ACT 9:29 talking and arguing with the Jews of foreign birth, who, however, made attempts to kill him.
ACT 9:30 But, when the followers found this out, they took him down to Caesarea, and sent him on his way to Tarsus.
ACT 9:31 And so it came about that the church, throughout Judea, Galilee, and Samaria, enjoyed peace and became firmly established; and, ordering its life by respect for the Lord and the help of the Holy Spirit, it increased in numbers.
ACT 9:32 Peter, while traveling from place to place throughout the country, went down to visit the people of Christ living at Lydda.
ACT 9:33 There he found a man named Aeneas, who had been bedridden for eight years with paralysis.
ACT 9:34 ‘Aeneas,’ Peter said to him, ‘Jesus Christ cures you. Get up, and make your bed.’ Aeneas got up at once;
ACT 9:35 and all the inhabitants of Lydda and of the Plain of Sharon saw him, and came over to the Lord’s side.
ACT 9:36 At Joppa there lived a disciple whose name was Tabitha, which is in Greek “Dorcas” – a Gazelle. Her life was spent in doing kind and charitable actions.
ACT 9:37 Just at that time she was taken ill, and died; and they had washed her body and laid it out in an upstairs room.
ACT 9:38 Joppa was near Lydda, and the disciples, having heard that Peter was at Lydda, sent two men with the request that he come to them without delay.
ACT 9:39 Peter returned with them at once. On his arrival, he was taken upstairs, and all the widows came round him in tears, showing the coats and other clothing which Dorcas had made while she was among them.
ACT 9:40 But Peter sent everybody out of the room, and knelt down and prayed. Then, turning to the body, he said, ‘Tabitha! Stand up.’ She opened her eyes, and, seeing Peter, sat up.
ACT 9:41 Giving her his hand, Peter raised her up, and, calling in the widows and others of Christ’s people, presented her to them alive.
ACT 9:42 This became known all through Joppa, and numbers of people came to believe in the Lord.
ACT 9:43 And Peter stayed some days at Joppa with a tanner named Simon.
ACT 10:1 At Caesarea there was a man named Cornelius, a centurion in the regiment known as the “Italian Regiment,”
ACT 10:2 A religious man and one who reverenced God, with all his household. He was liberal in his charities to the people, and prayed to God constantly.
ACT 10:3 One afternoon, about three o’clock, he distinctly saw in a vision an angel from God come to him, and call him by name.
ACT 10:4 Cornelius fixed his eyes on him and, in great alarm, said, ‘What is it, Lord?’ ‘Your prayers and your charities,’ the angel answered, ‘have been an acceptable offering to God.
ACT 10:5 And now, send messengers to Joppa and fetch a man called Simon, who is also known as Peter.
ACT 10:6 He is lodging with a tanner named Simon, who has a house near the sea.’
ACT 10:7 When the angel, who had spoken to him, had gone, Cornelius called two servants and a religious soldier, who was one of his constant attendants,
ACT 10:8 and, after telling them the whole story, sent them to Joppa.
ACT 10:9 On the next day, while these men were on their way, just as they were nearing the town, Peter went up on the housetop about midday to pray.
ACT 10:10 He became hungry and wanted something to eat; but while it was being prepared, he fell into a trance,
ACT 10:11 and saw that the heavens were open, and that something like a great sail was descending, let down by its four corners towards the earth.
ACT 10:12 In it were all kinds of quadrupeds, reptiles, and birds.
ACT 10:13 Then he was aware of a voice which said – ‘Stand up, Peter, kill something, and eat.’
ACT 10:14 ‘No, Lord, I cannot,’ answered Peter, ‘for I have never eaten anything defiled and unclean.’
ACT 10:15 Again he was aware of a voice which said – ‘What God has pronounced clean, do not regard as defiled.’
ACT 10:16 This happened three times, and then suddenly it was all taken up into the heavens.
ACT 10:17 While Peter was still perplexed as to the meaning of the vision that he had seen, the men sent by Cornelius, having enquired the way to Simon’s house, came up to the gate,
ACT 10:18 and called out and asked if the Simon, who was also known as Peter, was lodging there.
ACT 10:19 Peter was still pondering over the vision, when the Spirit said to him, ‘There are two men looking for you at this moment.
ACT 10:20 Go down at once and do not hesitate to go with them, for I have sent them.’
ACT 10:21 Peter went down to the men and said, ‘I am the person you are looking for. What is your reason for coming?’
ACT 10:22 The men replied, ‘Our centurion, Cornelius, a pious man who reverences God and is well spoken of by the whole Jewish nation, has been instructed by a holy angel to send for you to his house, and to listen to what you have to say.’
ACT 10:23 So Peter invited them in and entertained them. The next day he lost no time in setting out with them, accompanied by some of the Lord’s followers from Joppa;
ACT 10:24 and the day following he entered Caesarea. Cornelius was expecting them, and had invited his relatives and intimate friends to meet them.
ACT 10:25 So, when Peter entered the city, Cornelius met him, and, throwing himself at Peter’s feet, bowed to the ground.
ACT 10:26 Peter, however, lifted him up, saying as he did so, ‘Stand up, I am only human like yourself.’
ACT 10:27 Talking with him as he went, Peter entered the house, where he found a large gathering of people, to whom he said,
ACT 10:28 ‘You are doubtless aware that it is forbidden for a Jew to be intimate with a foreigner, or even to enter his house; and yet God has shown me that I ought not to call anyone defiled or unclean.
ACT 10:29 That was why I came, when I was sent for, without raising any objection. And now I ask your reason for sending for me.’
ACT 10:30 ‘Just three days ago this very hour,’ Cornelius said, ‘I was in my house, saying the Afternoon Prayers, when a man in dazzling clothing suddenly stood before me.
ACT 10:31 “Cornelius,” he said, “your prayer has been heard, and your charities have been accepted, by God.
ACT 10:32 Therefore send to Joppa, and invite the Simon, who is also known as Peter, to come here. He is lodging in the house of Simon the tanner, near the sea.”
ACT 10:33 Accordingly I sent to you at once, and you have been so good as to come. And now we are all here in the presence of God, to listen to all that you have been instructed by the Lord to say.’
ACT 10:34 Then Peter began. ‘I see, beyond all doubt,’ he said, ‘that God does not show partiality,
ACT 10:35 but that in every nation he who reverences him and does what is right is acceptable to him.
ACT 10:36 God has sent his message to the Israelites and told them, through Jesus Christ, the good news of peace – and Jesus is Lord of all!
ACT 10:37 You yourselves know the story which spread through all Judea, how, beginning from Galilee, after the baptism which John proclaimed –
ACT 10:38 the story, I mean, of Jesus of Nazareth, and how God consecrated him his Christ by enduing him with the Holy Spirit and with power; and how he went about doing good and curing all who were under the power of the devil, because God was with him.
ACT 10:39 We are ourselves, too, witnesses to all that he did in Judea and in Jerusalem; yet they put him to death by hanging him on a cross!
ACT 10:40 This Jesus God raised on the third day, and enabled him to appear,
ACT 10:41 not indeed to everyone, but to witnesses chosen beforehand by God – to us, who ate and drank with him after his resurrection from the dead.
ACT 10:42 Further, God charged us to proclaim to the people, and solemnly affirm, that it is Jesus who has been appointed by God judge of the living and the dead.
ACT 10:43 To him it is that all the prophets bear witness, when they say that everyone who believes in him receives through his name forgiveness of sins.’
ACT 10:44 Before Peter had finished saying these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all who were listening to the message.
ACT 10:45 Those converts from Judaism, who had come with Peter, were amazed that the gift of the Holy Spirit had been bestowed even on the Gentiles;
ACT 10:46 for they heard them speaking in different languages and extolling God. At this Peter asked,
ACT 10:47 ‘Can anyone refuse the water for the baptism of these people, now that they have received the Holy Spirit as we did ourselves?’
ACT 10:48 And he directed that they should be baptised in the name of Jesus Christ; after which they asked him to stay there a few days longer.
ACT 11:1 The apostles and the followers throughout Judea heard that even the Gentiles had welcomed God’s message.
ACT 11:2 But, when Peter went up to Jerusalem, those who were converts from Judaism began to attack him,
ACT 11:3 on the ground that he had visited people who were not circumcised, and had taken meals with them.
ACT 11:4 So Peter began to relate the facts to them as they had occurred.
ACT 11:5 ‘I was in the town of Joppa,’ he said, ‘and was praying; and, while in a trance, I saw a vision. There was something like a great sail descending, let down by its four corners out of the heavens; and it came right down to me.
ACT 11:6 Looking intently at it, I began to distinguish quadrupeds, wild beasts, reptiles, and birds;
ACT 11:7 and I also heard a voice saying to me – “Stand up, Peter, kill something and eat.”
ACT 11:8 “No, Lord, I cannot,” I answered, “for nothing defiled or unclean has ever passed my lips.”
ACT 11:9 Then a second time there came a voice from the heavens. “What God has pronounced clean”, it said, “you must not call defiled.”
ACT 11:10 This happened three times, and then all was drawn up again into the heavens.
ACT 11:11 At that moment three men, who had been sent from Caesarea to see me, came up to the house in which we were.
ACT 11:12 The Spirit told me to go with them without hesitation. These six companions also went with me. And, when we came into the man’s house,
ACT 11:13 he told us how he had seen the angel standing in his house, and how the angel had said to him – “Send to Joppa and fetch the Simon, who is also known as Peter;
ACT 11:14 for he will tell you truths, which will prove the means of salvation to you and all your household.”
ACT 11:15 I had but just begun to speak,’ continued Peter, ‘when the Holy Spirit fell on them, exactly as on us at the first;
ACT 11:16 and I recalled the saying of the Master – “John baptised with water, but you will be baptised with the Holy Spirit.”
ACT 11:17 Since then, God had given them the very same gift as he gave us when we became believers in Jesus Christ the Master – who was I that I could thwart God?’
ACT 11:18 On hearing this statement, they said no more, but broke out into praise of God. ‘So even to the Gentiles,’ they exclaimed, ‘God has granted the repentance which leads to life!’
ACT 11:19 Now those who had been scattered in different directions, in consequence of the persecution that followed the death of Stephen, went as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, telling the message – but only to Jews.
ACT 11:20 Some of them, however, who were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, on coming to Antioch, addressed themselves also to the Jews of foreign birth, telling them the good news about that Lord Jesus.
ACT 11:21 The power of the Lord was with them, so that a great number who had learned to believe came over to the Lord’s side.
ACT 11:22 The news about them reached the ears of the church at Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas to Antioch.
ACT 11:23 On coming there he saw to his great joy these tokens of the loving kindness of God, and encouraged them all to make up their minds to be faithful to the Lord –
ACT 11:24 For Barnabas was a good man and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith – and a large number of people took their stand on the Lord’s side.
ACT 11:25 Afterwards Barnabas left for Tarsus to look for Saul;
ACT 11:26 and, when he had found him, he brought him to Antioch. And so it came about that, for a whole year, they attended the meetings of the church there, and taught a large number of people; and it was in Antioch that the disciples were first called “Christians.”
ACT 11:27 During this time, some prophets came to Antioch from Jerusalem.
ACT 11:28 One of them, named Agabus, came forward and, under the influence of the Spirit, foretold a great famine that was to spread over all the world – a famine which occurred in the reign of Claudius.
ACT 11:29 So the disciples, without exception, determined, in proportion to their means, to send something to help the followers living in Judea.
ACT 11:30 And this they did, sending it to the church elders by Barnabas and Saul.
ACT 12:1 It was at that time that King Herod began to ill-treat some of the members of the church.
ACT 12:2 He had James, the brother of John, beheaded;
ACT 12:3 and, when he saw that the Jews were pleased with this, he proceeded to arrest Peter also. (This was during the Festival of the unleavened bread.)
ACT 12:4 After seizing Peter, Herod put him in prison, and entrusted him to the keeping of four Guards of four soldiers each, intending, after the Passover, to bring him up before the people.
ACT 12:5 So Peter was kept in prison, but meanwhile the prayers of the church were being earnestly offered to God on his behalf.
ACT 12:6 Just when Herod was intending to bring him before the people, on that very night Peter was asleep between two soldiers, chained to them both, while there were sentries in front of the door, guarding the prison.
ACT 12:7 Suddenly an angel of the Lord stood by him, and a light shone in the cell. The angel struck Peter on the side, and roused him with the words, ‘Get up quickly.’
ACT 12:8 The chains dropped from his wrists, and then the angel said, ‘Put on your belt and sandals.’ When Peter had done so, the angel added, ‘Throw your cloak round you and follow me.’
ACT 12:9 Peter followed him out, not knowing that what was happening under the angel’s guidance was real, but thinking that he was seeing a vision.
ACT 12:10 Passing the first Guard, and then the second, they came to the iron gate leading into the city, which opened to them of itself; and, when they had passed through that, and had walked along one street, all at once the angel left him.
ACT 12:11 Then Peter came to himself and said, ‘Now I know beyond all doubt that the Lord has sent his angel, and has rescued me from Herod’s hands and from all that the Jewish people have been expecting.’
ACT 12:12 As soon as he realized what had happened, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John who was also known as Mark, where a number of people were gathered together, praying.
ACT 12:13 On his knocking at the door in the gate, a maidservant, named Rhoda, came to answer it.
ACT 12:14 She recognized Peter’s voice, but in her joy left the gate unopened, and ran in, and told them that Peter was standing outside.
ACT 12:15 ‘You are mad!’ they exclaimed. But, when she persisted that it was so, they said, ‘It must be his spirit!’
ACT 12:16 Meanwhile Peter went on knocking, and, when they opened the gate and saw him, they were amazed.
ACT 12:17 Peter signed to them with his hand to be silent, and then told them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison, adding, ‘Tell James and the others all this.’ Then he left the house, and went away to another place.
ACT 12:18 In the morning there was a great stir among the soldiers – what could have become of Peter!
ACT 12:19 And, when Herod had made further search for him and failed to find him, he closely questioned the Guard, and ordered them away to execution. Then he went down from Judea to stay at Caesarea.
ACT 12:20 It happened that Herod was deeply offended with the people of Tyre and Sidon, but they went in a body to him, and, having succeeded in winning over Blastus, the Chamberlain, they begged Herod for a reconciliation, because their country was dependent on the king’s for its food supply.
ACT 12:21 On an appointed day Herod, wearing his state robes, seated himself on his throne, and delivered an oration.
ACT 12:22 The people kept shouting, ‘It is the voice of God, and not of a person!’
ACT 12:23 Instantly an angel of the Lord struck him, because he did not give God the glory; and he was attacked with worms, and died.
ACT 12:24 Meanwhile the Lord’s message kept extending, and spreading far and wide.
ACT 12:25 When Barnabas and Saul had carried out their mission, they returned to Jerusalem, and took with them John, who was also known as Mark.
ACT 13:1 Among the members of the church at Antioch there were several prophets and teachers – Barnabas, Simeon who was known by the name of “Black”, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen, foster-brother of Prince Herod, and Saul.
ACT 13:2 While they were engaged in the worship of the Lord and were fasting, the Holy Spirit said, ‘Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul, for the work to which I have called them.’
ACT 13:3 Accordingly, after fasting and prayer, they placed their hands on them and dismissed them.
ACT 13:4 Barnabas and Saul, sent on this mission, as they were, by the Holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia, and from there sailed to Cyprus.
ACT 13:5 On reaching Salamis, they began to tell the message of God in the Jewish synagogues; and they had John with them as an assistant.
ACT 13:6 After passing through the whole island, they reached Paphos, where they found an astrologer who pretended to be a prophet – a Jew by birth, whose name was Barjoshua.
ACT 13:7 He was at the court of the Governor, Sergius Paulus, a man of intelligence, who sent for Barnabas and Saul and asked to be told God’s message.
ACT 13:8 But Elymas, the astrologer (for that is the meaning of the word), opposed them, eager to divert the Governor’s attention from the faith.
ACT 13:9 However, Saul (who is the same as Paul), full of the Holy Spirit, fixed his eyes on him and said,
ACT 13:10 ‘You incarnation of deceit and all fraud! You son of the devil! You opponent of all that is good! Will you never cease to divert the straight paths of the Lord? Listen!
ACT 13:11 The hand of the Lord is on you even now, and you will be blind for a time and unable to see the sun.’ Immediately a mist and darkness fell on him, and he went feeling about for someone to guide him.
ACT 13:12 When the Governor saw what had happened, he became a believer in Christ, being greatly impressed by the teaching about the Lord.
ACT 13:13 After this, Paul and his companions set sail from Paphos and went to Perga in Pamphylia, where John left them and returned to Jerusalem.
ACT 13:14 The others went on from Perga and arrived at Antioch in Pisidia. There they went into the synagogue on the Sabbath and took their seats.
ACT 13:15 After the reading of the Law and the prophets, the synagogue leader sent them this message – ‘Friends, if you have any helpful words to address to the people, now is the time to speak.’
ACT 13:16 So Paul rose and, motioning with his hand, said: ‘People of Israel and all here who worship God, hear what I have to say.
ACT 13:17 The God of this people Israel chose our ancestors, and during their stay in Egypt increased the prosperity of the people, and then with uplifted arm brought them out from that land.
ACT 13:18 For about forty years he bore with them in the desert;
ACT 13:19 then, after destroying seven heathen nations in Canaan, he allotted their land to this people –
ACT 13:20 For about four hundred and fifty years. In later times he gave them Judges, of whom the prophet Samuel was the last.
ACT 13:21 And, when they demanded a king, God gave them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, who reigned for forty years.
ACT 13:22 After removing him, he raised David to the throne, and bore this testimony to him – “In David, the son of Jesse, I have found a man after my own heart, who will carry out all my purposes.”
ACT 13:23 It was from this man’s descendants that God, in accordance with his promise, gave Israel a Saviour – Jesus;
ACT 13:24 John having first proclaimed, before the appearance of Jesus, a baptism on repentance for all the people of Israel.
ACT 13:25 As John was drawing towards the end of his career, he said “What do you suppose that I am? I am not the Christ. But there is ‘one coming’ after me, whose sandal I am not worthy to untie.”
ACT 13:26 Brothers and sisters, descendants of Abraham, and all those among you who worship God, it was to us that the message of this salvation was sent.
ACT 13:27 The people of Jerusalem and their leaders, failing to recognise Jesus, and not understanding the utterances of the prophets that are read every Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning him.
ACT 13:28 They found no ground at all for putting him to death, and yet demanded his execution from Pilate;
ACT 13:29 and, after carrying out everything written about him, they took Jesus down from the cross, and laid him in a tomb.
ACT 13:30 But God raised him from the dead;
ACT 13:31 and he appeared for many days to those who had gone up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, and who are now witnesses for him to the people.
ACT 13:32 We also have good news to tell you, about the promise made to our ancestors –
ACT 13:33 That our children have had this promise completely fulfilled to them by God, by his raising Jesus. That is just what is said in the second Psalm – “You are my Son; this day I have become your Father.”
ACT 13:34 As to his raising Jesus from the dead, never again to return to corruption, this is what is said – “I will give to you the sacred promises made to David;”
ACT 13:35 And, therefore, in another Psalm it is said – “You will not give up the Holy One to undergo corruption.”
ACT 13:36 David, after obediently doing God’s will in his own time, fell asleep and was laid by the side of his ancestors, and did undergo corruption;
ACT 13:37 but Jesus, whom God raised from the dead, did not undergo corruption.
ACT 13:38 I would, therefore, like you to know, friends, that through Jesus forgiveness of sins is being proclaimed to you,
ACT 13:39 and that, in union with him, everyone who believes in him is absolved from every sin from which under the Law of Moses you could not be absolved.
ACT 13:40 Beware, therefore, that what is said in the prophets does not come true of you –
ACT 13:41 “Look, you despisers, and wonder, and perish; for I am doing a deed in your days – a deed which, though told you in full, you will never believe”.’
ACT 13:42 As Paul and Barnabas were leaving the synagogue, the people begged for a repetition of this teaching on the next Sabbath.
ACT 13:43 After the congregation had dispersed, many of the Jews, and of the converts who joined in their worship, followed Paul and Barnabas, who talked with them and urged them to continue to rely on the loving kindness of God.
ACT 13:44 On the following Sabbath, almost all the city gathered to hear God’s message.
ACT 13:45 But the sight of the crowds of people filled the minds of the Jews with jealousy, and they kept contradicting Paul’s statements in violent language.
ACT 13:46 Then Paul and Barnabas spoke out fearlessly, and said: ‘It was necessary that the message of God should be told to you first; but, since you reject it and reckon yourselves not worthy of the eternal life – we turn to the Gentiles!
ACT 13:47 For this is the Lord’s command to us – “I have destined you for a light to the Gentiles, a means of salvation to the ends of the earth”.’
ACT 13:48 On hearing this, the Gentiles were glad and extolled God’s message; and all those who had been enrolled for eternal life became believers in Christ;
ACT 13:49 and the Lord’s message was carried throughout that district.
ACT 13:50 But the Jews incited the women of high social standing who worshiped with them, and the leading men of the town, and started a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and drove them out of their region.
ACT 13:51 They, however, shook the dust off their feet in protest,
ACT 13:52 and went to Iconium, leaving the disciples full of joy and of the Holy Spirit.
ACT 14:1 The same thing occurred in Iconium, where Paul and Barnabas went into the Jewish synagogue, and spoke in such a way that a great number of both Jews and Greeks believed in Christ.
ACT 14:2 But the Jews who refused to believe stirred up the Gentiles, and poisoned their minds against the Lord’s followers.
ACT 14:3 Therefore Paul and Barnabas spent a long time there, and spoke out fearlessly, relying on the Lord, who confirmed the message of his love by permitting signs and wonders to take place at their hands.
ACT 14:4 But the townspeople were divided, some siding with the Jews, some with the apostles;
ACT 14:5 and, when there was an attempt on the part of both Gentiles and Jews, with their leaders, to resort to violence and to stone them,
ACT 14:6 the apostles heard of it, and took refuge in Lystra and Derbe, towns in Lycaonia, and in the district round,
ACT 14:7 and there they continued to tell the good news.
ACT 14:8 In the streets of Lystra there used to sit a man who had no power in his feet; he had been lame from his birth, and had never walked.
ACT 14:9 This man was listening to Paul speaking, when Paul, looking intently at him, and seeing that he had the faith to be healed,
ACT 14:10 said loudly, ‘Stand upright on your feet.’ The man leaped up, and began walking about,
ACT 14:11 and the crowd, seeing what Paul had done, called out in the Lycaonian language, ‘The Gods have come down to us in human form.’
ACT 14:12 So they called Barnabas “Zeus,” and Paul “Hermes,” because he took the lead in speaking;
ACT 14:13 and the priest of Zeus-beyond-the-Walls, accompanied by the crowd, brought bullocks and garlands to the gates, with the intention of offering sacrifices.
ACT 14:14 But, when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of it, they tore their clothes and rushed out into the crowd. ‘Friends, why are you doing this?’ they shouted.
ACT 14:15 ‘We are only people like yourselves, and we have come with the good news that you should turn away from these follies to a living God, who made the heavens, the earth, the sea, and everything that is in them.
ACT 14:16 In bygone times he permitted all the nations to go their own ways.
ACT 14:17 Yet he has not failed to give you, in the good he does, some revelation of himself – sending you from heaven rain and fruitful seasons, and gladdening your hearts with plenty and good cheer.’
ACT 14:18 Even with this appeal they could hardly restrain the people from offering sacrifice to them.
ACT 14:19 Presently, however, there came some Jews from Antioch, and Iconium who, after they had won over the people, stoned Paul, and dragged him out of the town, thinking him to be dead.
ACT 14:20 But, when the disciples had gathered round him, he got up and went back into the town; the next day he went with Barnabas to Derbe.
ACT 14:21 After telling the good news throughout that town, and making a number of converts, they returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch,
ACT 14:22 reassuring the minds of the disciples, urging them to remain true to the faith, and showing that it is only through many troubles that we can enter the kingdom of God.
ACT 14:23 They also appointed elders for them in every church, and, after prayer and fasting, commended them to the Lord in whom they had learned to believe.
ACT 14:24 Paul and Barnabas then went through Pisidia, and came into Pamphylia,
ACT 14:25 and, after telling the message at Perga, went down to Attaleia.
ACT 14:26 From there they sailed to Antioch – the place where they had been committed to the gracious care of God for the work which they had now finished.
ACT 14:27 After their arrival, they gathered the church together, and gave an account of all that God had helped them to do, and especially how he had opened to the Gentiles the door of faith;
ACT 14:28 and at Antioch they stayed with the disciples for a considerable time.
ACT 15:1 But certain persons came down from Judea, and began to teach the Lord’s followers that, unless they were circumcised, in accordance with the custom required by Moses, they could not be saved.
ACT 15:2 This gave rise to a serious dispute, and much discussion, between Paul and Barnabas and these people, and it was therefore settled that Paul and Barnabas and others of their number should go up to Jerusalem, to consult the apostles and church elders about the matter under discussion.
ACT 15:3 The church, therefore, sent them on their journey, and they made their way through Phoenicia and Samaria, telling the story of the conversion of the Gentiles, to the great joy of all the followers.
ACT 15:4 On their arrival at Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church, as well as by the apostles and the elders, and gave an account of all that God had helped them to do.
ACT 15:5 Some of the Pharisees’ party, however, who had become believers in Christ, came forward and declared that they were bound to circumcise converts and to direct them to observe the Law of Moses.
ACT 15:6 The apostles and the church elders held a meeting to consider this question.
ACT 15:7 After much discussion, Peter rose and said: ‘You, my friends, know well that long ago God singled me out – that through my lips the Gentiles should hear the message of the good news, and become believers in Christ.
ACT 15:8 Now God, who reads all hearts, declared his acceptance of the Gentiles, by giving them the Holy Spirit, just as he did to us.
ACT 15:9 He made no distinction between them and us, when he purified their hearts by their faith.
ACT 15:10 Why, then, do you now provoke God, by putting on the necks of these disciples a yoke which neither our ancestors nor we were able to bear?
ACT 15:11 No, it is through the loving kindness of the Lord Jesus that we, just as they do, believe that we have been saved.’
ACT 15:12 Every voice in the assembly was hushed, as they listened to Barnabas and Paul, while they gave an account of all the signs and wonders which God had shown among the Gentiles through them.
ACT 15:13 After they had finished speaking, James addressed the Council. ‘Friends,’ he began, ‘hear what I have to say.
ACT 15:14 Simon has described the manner in which God first visited the Gentiles, in order to take from among them a people to bear his name.
ACT 15:15 And that is in harmony with the words of the prophets, where they say –
ACT 15:16 “After this I will return; and I will rebuild the house of David which has fallen – its ruins I will rebuild, and will set it up once more;
ACT 15:17 that so the rest of mankind may earnestly seek the Lord – even all the Gentiles on whom my name has been bestowed,
ACT 15:18 says the Lord, as he does these things, known from long ago.”
ACT 15:19 In my judgment, therefore, we should not add to the difficulties of those Gentiles who are turning to God,
ACT 15:20 but we should write to them to abstain from food that has been polluted by being sacrificed to idols, from impurity, from eating the flesh of strangled animals, and from blood.
ACT 15:21 For in every town, for generations past, there have been those who preach Moses, read as he is in the synagogues every Sabbath.’
ACT 15:22 It was then decided by the apostles and the elders, with the assent of the whole church, to choose some of their number, and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas. Those chosen were Judas (called Barsabas) and Silas, who were leaders among the community.
ACT 15:23 They were bearers of the following letter – “The apostles, and the followers who are the church elders, send their greetings to the followers of the Lord of Gentile birth in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia.
ACT 15:24 As we had heard that some of our number had upset you by their assertions, and unsettled your minds – without instructions from us –
ACT 15:25 We met and decided to choose certain men and send them to you with our dear friends Barnabas and Paul,
ACT 15:26 who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord, Jesus Christ.
ACT 15:27 We are accordingly sending Judas and Silas, and they will tell you by word of mouth what we are now writing.
ACT 15:28 We have, therefore, decided, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, to lay no further burden on you beyond these necessary conditions –
ACT 15:29 That you abstain from food offered to idols, from blood, from eating the flesh of strangled animals, and from impurity. If you guard yourselves against such things, it will be well with you. Farewell.”
ACT 15:30 So the bearers of this letter were sent on their way, and went down to Antioch. There they called a meeting of all the followers,
ACT 15:31 and delivered the letter, the reading of which caused great rejoicing by its encouraging contents.
ACT 15:32 Judas and Silas, who were themselves prophets, further encouraged the them by many an address, and strengthened their faith.
ACT 15:33 After some stay, they were dismissed with kind farewells from the followers, and returned to those who had sent them.
ACT 15:34 
ACT 15:35 Paul and Barnabas, however, remained in Antioch, where they taught and, with the help of many others, told the good news of the Lord’s message.
ACT 15:36 Some time after this, Paul said to Barnabas, ‘Let us go back and visit the Lord’s followers in every town in which we have told the Lord’s message, and see how they are prospering.’
ACT 15:37 Barnabas wished to take with them John, whose other name was Mark;
ACT 15:38 but Paul felt that they ought not to take with them the man who had deserted them in Pamphylia, and had not gone on with them to their work.
ACT 15:39 This caused such unpleasant feeling between them that they parted ways, Barnabas taking Mark and sailing for Cyprus,
ACT 15:40 while Paul chose Silas for his companion and, after he had been committed by the followers to the gracious care of the Lord,
ACT 15:41 started on his journey and went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the churches in the faith.
ACT 16:1 Among other places Paul went to Derbe and Lystra. At the latter place they found a disciple, named Timothy, whose mother was a Jewish woman who was a believer, while his father was a Greek,
ACT 16:2 and who was well spoken of by the followers of the Lord in Lystra and Iconium.
ACT 16:3 Wishing to take this man with him on his journey, Paul caused him to be circumcised out of consideration for the Jews in that region, for they all knew that his father had been a Greek.
ACT 16:4 As they traveled from town to town, they gave the followers the decisions which had been reached by the apostles and church elders at Jerusalem, for them to observe.
ACT 16:5 So the churches grew stronger in the faith, and increased in numbers from day to day.
ACT 16:6 They next went through the Phrygian district of Galatia, but were restrained by the Holy Spirit from delivering the message in Roman Asia.
ACT 16:7 When they reached the borders of Mysia, they attempted to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not permit them.
ACT 16:8 Passing through Mysia, they went down to Troas;
ACT 16:9 and there one night Paul saw a vision. A Macedonian was standing and appealing to him – “Come over to Macedonia and help us.”
ACT 16:10 So, immediately after Paul had seen the vision, we looked for an opportunity to cross over to Macedonia, concluding that God had summoned us to tell the good news to the people there.
ACT 16:11 Accordingly we set sail from Troas, and ran before the wind to Samothrace, reaching Neapolis the next day.
ACT 16:12 From there we made our way to Philippi, which is the principal city of that part of Macedonia, and also a Roman Settlement. In that city we spent several days.
ACT 16:13 On the Sabbath we went outside the gate to the riverside, where we supposed there would be a place of prayer; and we sat down and talked to the women who were gathered there.
ACT 16:14 Among them was a woman, named Lydia, belonging to Thyatira, a dealer in purple cloth, who was accustomed to join in the worship of God. The Lord touched this woman’s heart, so that she gave attention to the message delivered by Paul,
ACT 16:15 and, when she and her household had been baptised, she urged us to become her guests. ‘Since you have shown your conviction,’ she said, ‘that I really am a believer in the Lord, come and stay in my house.’ And she insisted on our doing so.
ACT 16:16 One day, as we were on our way to the place of prayer, we were met by a girl possessed by a divining spirit, who made large profits for her masters by fortune-telling.
ACT 16:17 This girl followed Paul and the rest of us, calling, ‘These men are servants of the most high God, and they are bringing you news of a way to salvation.’
ACT 16:18 She had been doing this for several days, when Paul, much vexed, turned and said to the spirit within her, ‘In the name of Jesus Christ I command you to leave her.’ That very moment the spirit left her.
ACT 16:19 When her masters saw that there was no hope of further profit from her, they seized Paul and Silas, dragged them into the public square to the authorities,
ACT 16:20 and took them before the Magistrates. ‘These men are causing a great disturbance in our town,’ they complained;
ACT 16:21 ‘They are Jews, and they are teaching customs which it is not right for us, as Romans, to sanction or adopt.’
ACT 16:22 The mob rose as one person against them, and the Magistrates stripped them of their clothing and ordered them to be beaten with rods.
ACT 16:23 After beating them severely, the Magistrates put them in prison, with orders to the jailer to keep them in safe custody.
ACT 16:24 On receiving so strict an order, the Governor put them into the inner cell, and secured their feet in the stocks.
ACT 16:25 About midnight, while Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and while the prisoners were listening to them,
ACT 16:26 suddenly there was an earthquake of such violence that the jail was shaken to its foundations; all the doors flew open, and all the prisoners’ chains were loosened.
ACT 16:27 Roused from his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, the Governor drew his sword intending to kill himself, in the belief that the prisoners had escaped.
ACT 16:28 But Paul called out loudly, ‘Do not harm yourself! We are all here.’
ACT 16:29 Calling for a light, the Governor rushed in, and flung himself trembling at the feet of Paul and Silas.
ACT 16:30 Then he led them out, and said, ‘What must I do to be saved?’
ACT 16:31 ‘Believe in Jesus, our Lord,’ they replied, ‘and you will be saved, you and your household too.’
ACT 16:32 Then they spoke to him of God’s message, and to all his household as well.
ACT 16:33 And that very hour of the night he took them and washed their wounds, and he himself and everyone belonging to him were baptised without delay.
ACT 16:34 Afterwards he took them up to his house and set before them something to eat, rejoicing that he, with all his household, had come to believe in God.
ACT 16:35 In the morning the Magistrates sent the guards with an order for the men to be discharged.
ACT 16:36 The jailer told Paul of his instructions. ‘The Magistrates have sent an order for your discharge,’ he said, ‘so you had better leave the place at once and go quietly away.’
ACT 16:37 But Paul’s answer to them was, ‘They have flogged us in public without trial, though we are Roman citizens, and they have put us in prison, and now they are for sending us out secretly! No, indeed! Let them come and take us out themselves.’
ACT 16:38 The guards reported his words to the Magistrates, who, on hearing that Paul and Silas were Roman citizens, were alarmed,
ACT 16:39 and went to the prison, and did their best to conciliate them. Then they took them out, and begged them to leave the city.
ACT 16:40 When Paul and Silas left the prison, they went to Lydia’s house, and, after they had seen the Lord’s followers, and encouraged them, they left the place.
ACT 17:1 After passing through Amphipolis and Apollonia, Paul and Silas came to Thessalonica. Here the Jews had a synagogue;
ACT 17:2 and, following his usual custom, Paul joined them, and for three Sabbaths addressed them, drawing his arguments from the scriptures.
ACT 17:3 He laid before them and explained that the Christ must undergo suffering and rise from the dead; and ‘It is this man,’ he declared, ‘who is the Christ – this Jesus about whom I am telling you.’
ACT 17:4 Some of the people were convinced, and threw in their lot with Paul and Silas, as did also a large body of Greeks who were accustomed to join in the Jewish services, and a great number of leading women.
ACT 17:5 But the Jewish leaders, becoming jealous, engaged some worthless fellows from the streets, and, getting a mob together, kept the city in an uproar. They attacked Jason’s house, with the intention of bringing Paul and Silas before the Popular Assembly;
ACT 17:6 and, not finding them there, they proceeded to drag Jason and some of the Lord’s followers before the city magistrates, shouting out, ‘These men, who have turned the world upside down, have now come here,
ACT 17:7 and have been harboured by Jason! They are all defying the decrees of the Emperor. They say that someone else is king – a man called Jesus!’
ACT 17:8 On hearing this, the people and the city magistrates were much concerned;
ACT 17:9 and, before letting them go, they took bail from Jason and the others.
ACT 17:10 That very night the followers sent Paul and Silas off to Beroea; and on reaching that place, they went to the Jewish synagogue.
ACT 17:11 These Jews of Beroea were better disposed than those in Thessalonica, for they welcomed the message with great readiness, and daily examined the scriptures to see if what was said was true.
ACT 17:12 As a consequence, many of them became believers in Christ, besides a considerable number of Greek women of position, and of men also.
ACT 17:13 But, when the Jewish leaders in Thessalonica found out that God’s message had been delivered by Paul at Beroea, they came there too, exciting and disturbing the minds of the people.
ACT 17:14 The followers immediately arranged for Paul to go away to the coast, but both Silas and Timothy stayed behind in Beroea.
ACT 17:15 The friends who escorted Paul took him as far as Athens, and, after receiving a message for Silas and Timothy to join him as quickly as possible, they started on their return.
ACT 17:16 While Paul was waiting for them at Athens, his heart was stirred at seeing the whole city full of idols.
ACT 17:17 So he argued in the synagogue with the Jews and with those who joined in their worship, as well as daily in the public Square with those who happened to be there.
ACT 17:18 Among others, some Epicurean and Stoic Philosophers joined issue with him. Some asked ‘What is this prater wanting to make out?’, while others said ‘He seems to be a preacher of foreign Deities.’ (This was because he was telling the good news about Jesus and the resurrection).
ACT 17:19 So they laid hold of him and took him to the Court of Areopagus. ‘May we hear,’ they asked, ‘what new teaching this is which you are giving?
ACT 17:20 For you are bringing some strange things to our notice, and we should like to know what they mean.’
ACT 17:21 (All Athenians and the foreigners staying in the city found no time for anything else but telling, or listening to, the last new thing.)
ACT 17:22 So Paul took his stand in the middle of the Court, and said – ‘People of Athens, on every hand I see signs of your being very devout.
ACT 17:23 For as I was going about, looking at your sacred shrines, I came upon an altar with this inscription – “To an Unknown God.” What, therefore, you worship in ignorance, that I am now proclaiming to you.
ACT 17:24 The God who made the world and all things that are in it – he, Lord as he is of heaven and earth, does not live in temples made by hands,
ACT 17:25 neither do human hands minister to his wants, as though he needed anything, since he himself gives, to all, life, and breath, and all things.
ACT 17:26 He made all races of the earth’s surface – fixing a time for their rise and fall, and the limits of their settlements –
ACT 17:27 That they might search for God, if by any means they might feel their way to him and find him. And yet he is not really far from any one of us;
ACT 17:28 for in him we live and move and are. To use the words of some of your own poets – “His offspring, too, are we.”
ACT 17:29 Therefore, as the offspring of God, we must not think that the Deity has any resemblance to anything made of gold, or silver, or stone – a work of human art and imagination.
ACT 17:30 True, God looked with indulgence on the days of people’s ignorance, but now he is announcing to everyone everywhere the need for repentance,
ACT 17:31 because he has fixed a day on which he intends to judge the world with justice, by a man whom he has appointed – and of this he has given all people a pledge by raising this man from the dead.’
ACT 17:32 On hearing of a resurrection of the dead, some began jeering, but others said that they wanted to hear what he had to say about that another time.
ACT 17:33 And so Paul left the Court.
ACT 17:34 There were, however, some people who joined him, and became believers in Christ. Among them were Dionysius, a member of the Court of Areopagus, a woman named Damaris, and several others.
ACT 18:1 On leaving Athens, Paul next went to Corinth.
ACT 18:2 There he met a Jew of the name of Aquila, from Pontus, who, with his wife Priscilla, had lately come from Italy, in consequence of the order which had been issued by the Emperor Claudius for all Jews to leave Rome. Paul paid them a visit,
ACT 18:3 and, since their trade was the same as his, he stayed and worked with them – their trade was tent-making.
ACT 18:4 Every Sabbath Paul gave addresses in the synagogue, trying to convince both Jews and Greeks.
ACT 18:5 But, when Silas and Timothy had come down from Macedonia, Paul devoted himself entirely to delivering the message, earnestly maintaining before the Jews that Jesus was the Christ.
ACT 18:6 However, as they set themselves against him and became abusive, Paul shook his clothes in protest and said to them, ‘Your blood be on your own heads. My conscience is clear. From this time forward I will go to the Gentiles.’
ACT 18:7 So he left, and went to the house of a certain Titius Justus, who had been accustomed to join in the worship of God, and whose house was next door to the synagogue.
ACT 18:8 Crispus, the synagogue leader, came to believe in the Lord, and so did all his household; and many of the Corinthians, as they listened to Paul, became believers in Christ and were baptised.
ACT 18:9 One night the Lord said to Paul, in a vision, ‘Have no fear, but continue to speak, and refuse to be silenced;
ACT 18:10 for I am with you, and no one will do you harm, for I have many people in this city.’
ACT 18:11 So he settled there for a year and a half, and taught God’s message among the people.
ACT 18:12 While Gallio was governor of Greece, some of the Jewish leaders made a combined attack on Paul, and brought him before the Governor’s Bench,
ACT 18:13 charging him with persuading people to worship God in a way forbidden by the Law.
ACT 18:14 Just as Paul was on the point of speaking, Gallio said to them, ‘If this were a case of misdemeanour or some serious crime, there would be some reason for my listening patiently to you;
ACT 18:15 but, since it is a dispute about words, and names, and your own Law, you must see to it yourselves. I do not choose to be a judge in such matters.’
ACT 18:16 Saying this, he drove them back from the Bench.
ACT 18:17 Then they all set on Sosthenes, the synagogue leader, and beat him in front of the Bench, but Gallio did not trouble himself about any of these things.
ACT 18:18 Paul remained there some time after this, and then took leave of the followers, and sailed to Syria with Priscilla and Aquila, but not before his head had been shaved at Cenchreae, because he was under a vow.
ACT 18:19 They put into Ephesus, and there Paul, leaving his companions, went into the synagogue and addressed the Jews.
ACT 18:20 When they asked him to prolong his stay, he declined, saying however,
ACT 18:21 as he took his leave, ‘I will come back again to you, please God,’ and then set sail from Ephesus.
ACT 18:22 On reaching Caesarea, he went up to Jerusalem and exchanged greetings with the church, and then went down to Antioch.
ACT 18:23 After making some stay in Antioch, he set out on a tour through the Phrygian district of Galatia, strengthening the faith of all the disciples as he went.
ACT 18:24 Meanwhile there had come to Ephesus an Alexandrian Jew, named Apollos, an eloquent man, who was well-versed in the scriptures.
ACT 18:25 He had been well-instructed in the Way of the Lord, and with burning zeal he spoke of, and taught carefully, the facts about Jesus, though he knew of no baptism but John’s.
ACT 18:26 This man began to speak out fearlessly in the synagogue; and when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him home and explained the Way of God to him more carefully still.
ACT 18:27 When he wanted to cross to Greece, the followers furthered his plans, and wrote to the disciples there to welcome him. On his arrival he proved of great assistance to those who had, through the loving kindness of God, become believers in Christ,
ACT 18:28 for he vigorously confuted the Jews, publicly proving by the scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.
ACT 19:1 While Apollos was at Corinth, Paul passed through the inland districts of Roman Asia, and went to Ephesus. There he found some disciples, of whom he asked,
ACT 19:2 ‘Did you, when you became believers in Christ, receive the Holy Spirit?’ ‘No,’ they answered, ‘we did not even hear that there was a Holy Spirit.’
ACT 19:3 ‘What then was your baptism?’ Paul asked.
ACT 19:4 ‘John’s baptism was a baptism on repentance,’ rejoined Paul, ‘and John told the people (speaking of the “one coming” after him) that they should believe in him – that is in Jesus.’
ACT 19:5 On hearing this, they were baptised in the name of the Lord Jesus,
ACT 19:6 and, after Paul had placed his hands on them, the Holy Spirit descended on them, and they began to speak in other languages and to preach.
ACT 19:7 There were about twelve of them in all.
ACT 19:8 Paul went to the synagogue there, and for three months spoke out fearlessly, giving addresses and trying to convince his hearers, about the kingdom of God.
ACT 19:9 Some of them, however, hardened their hearts and refused to believe, denouncing the Way before the people. So Paul left them and withdrew his disciples, and gave daily addresses in the lecture-hall of Tyrannus.
ACT 19:10 This went on for two years, so that all who lived in Roman Asia, Jews and Greeks alike, heard the Lord’s message.
ACT 19:11 God did miracles of no ordinary kind by Paul’s hands;
ACT 19:12 so that people would carry home to the sick handkerchiefs or aprons that had touched his body, and their diseases would leave them and the wicked spirits go out of them.
ACT 19:13 An attempt was made by some itinerant Jews, who were exorcists, to use the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had wicked spirits in them. ‘I order you,’ they would say, ‘by the Jesus, whom Paul preaches.’
ACT 19:14 The seven sons of Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, were doing this;
ACT 19:15 but the wicked spirit answered them, ‘Jesus I acknowledge, and Paul I know, but you – who are you?’
ACT 19:16 Then the man with the wicked spirit sprang on them, overpowered them, with such violence that they fled out of the house, stripped of their clothes and wounded.
ACT 19:17 This incident came to the knowledge of all the Jews and Greeks living at Ephesus; they were all awe-struck, and the name of the Lord Jesus was held in the highest honour.
ACT 19:18 Many, too, of those who had become believers in Christ came with a full confession of their practices;
ACT 19:19 while a number of people, who had practiced magic, collected their books and burnt them publicly; and on reckoning up the price of these, they found it amounted to fifty thousand silver coins.
ACT 19:20 So irresistibly did the Lord’s message spread and prevail.
ACT 19:21 Sometime after these events Paul resolved to go through Macedonia and Greece, and then make his way to Jerusalem. ‘And after I have been there,’ he said, ‘I must visit Rome also.’
ACT 19:22 So he sent to Macedonia two of his helpers, Timothy and Erastus, while he himself stayed for some time longer in Roman Asia.
ACT 19:23 Just about that time a great disturbance arose about the Way.
ACT 19:24 A silversmith named Demetrius, who made silver models of the shrine of Artemis, and so gave a great deal of work to the artisans,
ACT 19:25 got these men together, as well as the workmen engaged in similar occupations, and said: ‘Men, you know that our prosperity depends on this work,
ACT 19:26 and you see and hear that not only at Ephesus, but in almost the whole of Roman Asia, this Paul has convinced and won over great numbers of people, by his assertion that those Gods which are made by hands are not Gods at all.
ACT 19:27 So that not only is this business of ours likely to fall into discredit, but there is the further danger that the Temple of the great Goddess Artemis will be thought nothing of, and that she herself will be deprived of her splendour – though all Roman Asia and the whole world worship her.’
ACT 19:28 When they heard this, the men were greatly enraged, and began shouting – ‘Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!’
ACT 19:29 The commotion spread through the whole city, and the people rushed together into the amphitheater, dragging with them Gaius and Aristarchus, two Macedonians who were Paul’s traveling companions.
ACT 19:30 Paul wished to go into the amphitheater and face the people, but the disciples would not let him,
ACT 19:31 while some of the chief religious officials of the province, who were friendly to him, sent repeated entreaties to him not to trust himself inside.
ACT 19:32 Meanwhile some were shouting one thing and some another, for the Assembly was all in confusion, most of those present not even knowing why they had met.
ACT 19:33 But some of the crowd prompted Alexander, whom several of the Jewish leaders had pushed to the front, and he waved his hand to show that he wanted to speak in their defence to the people.
ACT 19:34 However, when they recognised him as a Jew, one cry broke from them all, and they continued shouting for two hours – ‘Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!’
ACT 19:35 When the Recorder had succeeded in quieting the crowd, he said, ‘People of Ephesus, who is there, I ask you, who needs to be told that this city of Ephesus is the Warden of the Temple of the great Artemis, and of the statue which fell down from Zeus?
ACT 19:36 As these are undeniable facts, you ought to keep calm and do nothing rash;
ACT 19:37 for you have brought these men here, though they are neither robbers of Temples nor blasphemers of our Goddess.
ACT 19:38 If, however, Demetrius and the artisans who are acting with him have a charge to make against anyone, there are court days and there are Magistrates; let both parties take legal proceedings.
ACT 19:39 But if you want anything more, it will have to be settled in the regular Assembly.
ACT 19:40 For I tell you that we are in danger of being proceeded against for today’s riot, there being nothing to account for it; and in that case we will be at a loss to give any reason for this disorderly gathering.’
ACT 19:41 With these words he dismissed the Assembly.
ACT 20:1 When the uproar had ceased, Paul sent for the disciples, and, with encouraging words, said goodbye to them, and started on his journey to Macedonia.
ACT 20:2 After going through those districts and speaking many encouraging words to the disciples, he went into Greece, where he stayed three months.
ACT 20:3 He was about to sail to Syria, when he learned that a plot had been laid against him by several of the Jewish leaders; so he decided to return by way of Macedonia.
ACT 20:4 He was accompanied by Sopater the son of Pyrrhus, of Beroea, Aristarchus and Secundus from Thessalonica, Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy, as well as by Tychicus and Trophimus of Roman Asia.
ACT 20:5 These people went to Troas and waited for us there;
ACT 20:6 while we ourselves sailed from Philippi after the Passover, and joined them five days later at Troas, where we stayed for a week.
ACT 20:7 On the first day of the week, when we had met for the breaking of bread, Paul, who was intending to leave the next day, began to address those who were present, and prolonged his address until midnight.
ACT 20:8 There were a good many lamps in the upstairs room, where we had met;
ACT 20:9 and a young man named Eutychus, sitting at the window, was gradually overcome with great drowsiness, as Paul continued his address. At last, quite overpowered by his drowsiness, he fell from the third story to the ground, and was picked up for dead.
ACT 20:10 But Paul went down, threw himself on him, and put his arms round him. ‘Do not be alarmed,’ he said, ‘he is still alive.’
ACT 20:11 Then he went upstairs; and, after breaking and partaking of the bread, he talked with them at great length until daybreak, and then left.
ACT 20:12 Meanwhile they had taken the boy away alive, and were greatly comforted.
ACT 20:13 We started first, went on board ship, and sailed for Assos, intending to take Paul on board there. This was by his own arrangement, as he intended to go by land himself.
ACT 20:14 So, when he met us at Assos, we took him on board and went on to Mitylene.
ACT 20:15 The day after we had sailed from there, we arrived off Chios, touched at Samos the following day, and the next day reached Miletus;
ACT 20:16 for Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus, so as to avoid spending much time in Roman Asia. He was making haste to reach Jerusalem, if possible, by the Festival at the close of the Harvest.
ACT 20:17 From Miletus, however, he sent to Ephesus and invited the church elders to meet him;
ACT 20:18 and, when they came, he said to them, ‘You know well the life that I always led among you from the very first day that I set foot in Roman Asia,
ACT 20:19 serving the Lord, as I did, in all humility, amid the tears and trials which fell to my lot through the plots of some of the Jewish leaders.
ACT 20:20 I never shrank from telling you anything that could be helpful to you, or from teaching you both in public and in private.
ACT 20:21 I earnestly pointed both Jews and Greeks to the repentance that leads to God, and to faith in Jesus, our Lord.
ACT 20:22 And now, under spiritual constraint, I am here on my way to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there,
ACT 20:23 except that in town after town the Holy Spirit plainly declares to me that imprisonment and troubles await me.
ACT 20:24 But I count my life of no value to myself, if only I may complete the course marked out for me, and the task that was allotted me by the Lord Jesus – which was to declare the good news of the love of God.
ACT 20:25 And now, I tell you, I know that none of you will ever see my face again – you among whom I have gone about proclaiming the kingdom.
ACT 20:26 Therefore I declare to you this day, that my conscience is clear in regard to the fate of any of you,
ACT 20:27 for I have not shrunk from announcing the whole purpose of God regarding you.
ACT 20:28 Be watchful over yourselves, and over the whole flock, of which the Holy Spirit has placed you in charge, to shepherd the church of God, which he won for himself at the cost of his life.
ACT 20:29 I know that, after my departure, merciless wolves will get in among you, who will not spare the flock;
ACT 20:30 and from among yourselves, too, people will arise, who will teach perversions of truth, so as to draw away the disciples after them.
ACT 20:31 Therefore, be on your guard, remembering how for three years, night and day, I never ceased, even with tears, to warn each one of you.
ACT 20:32 And now I commend you to the Lord and to the message of his love – a message which has the power to build up your characters, and to give you your place among all those who have become Christ’s people.
ACT 20:33 I have never coveted anyone’s gold or silver or clothing.
ACT 20:34 You, yourselves, know that these hands of mine provided not only for my own wants, but for my companions also.
ACT 20:35 I left nothing undone to show you that, labouring as I laboured, you ought to help the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said himself – “It is more blessed to give than to receive.”’
ACT 20:36 When Paul had finished speaking, he knelt down and prayed with them all.
ACT 20:37 All were in tears; and throwing their arms round Paul’s neck, they kissed him again and again,
ACT 20:38 grieving most of all over what he had said – that they would never see his face again. Then they escorted him to the ship.
ACT 21:1 When we had torn ourselves away and had set sail, we ran before the wind to Cos; the next day we came to Rhodes, and from there to Patara,
ACT 21:2 where we found a ship crossing to Phoenicia, and went on board and set sail.
ACT 21:3 After sighting Cyprus and leaving it on the left, we sailed to Syria, and put into Tyre, where the ship was to discharge her cargo.
ACT 21:4 There we found the disciples and stayed a week with them. Speaking under the influence of the Spirit, they warned Paul not to set foot in Jerusalem.
ACT 21:5 However, when we had come to the end of our visit, we went on our way, all the disciples with their wives and children escorting us out of the city. We knelt down on the beach, and prayed,
ACT 21:6 and then said goodbye to one another; after which we went on board, and they returned home.
ACT 21:7 After we had made the run from Tyre, we landed at Ptolemais, and exchanged greetings with the followers there, and spent a day with them.
ACT 21:8 The next day we left, and reached Caesarea, where we went to the house of Philip, the missionary, who was one of the Seven, and stayed with him.
ACT 21:9 He had four unmarried daughters, who had the gift of prophecy.
ACT 21:10 During our visit, which lasted several days, a prophet, named Agabus, came down from Judea.
ACT 21:11 He came to see us, and, taking Paul’s belt, and binding his own feet and hands with it, said, ‘This is what the Holy Spirit says – “The man to whom this belt belongs will be bound like this by the religious authorities in Jerusalem, and they will give him up to the Gentiles”.’
ACT 21:12 When we heard that, we and the people of the place began to entreat Paul not to go up to Jerusalem.
ACT 21:13 It was then that Paul made the reply, ‘Why are you weeping and breaking my heart like this? For my part, I am ready not only to be bound, but even to suffer death at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.’
ACT 21:14 So, as he would not be persuaded, we said no more to him, only adding – ‘The Lord’s will be done.’
ACT 21:15 At the end of our visit, we made our preparations, and started on our way up to Jerusalem.
ACT 21:16 Some of the disciples from Caesarea went with us, and brought Mnason with them, a Cypriot disciple of long standing, with whom we were to stay.
ACT 21:17 On our arrival at Jerusalem, the followers of the Lord there gave us a hearty welcome;
ACT 21:18 and the next day Paul went with us to see James, and all the church elders were present.
ACT 21:19 After greeting them, Paul related in detail all that God had done among the Gentiles through his efforts;
ACT 21:20 and, when they had heard it, they began praising God, and said to Paul: ‘You see, brother, that those of our people who have become believers in Christ may be numbered by tens of thousands, and they are all naturally earnest in upholding the Jewish Law.
ACT 21:21 Now they have heard it said about you, that you teach all of our people in foreign countries to forsake Moses, for you tell them not to circumcise their children or even to observe Jewish customs.
ACT 21:22 Well now, as they are certain to hear of your arrival, do what we are going to suggest.
ACT 21:23 We have four men here, who have of their own accord put themselves under a vow.
ACT 21:24 Join these men, share their purification, and bear their expenses, so that they may shave their heads; and then all will see that there is no truth in what they have been told about you, but that, on the contrary, you yourself rule your life in obedience to the Jewish Law.
ACT 21:25 As to the Gentiles who have become believers in Christ, we have sent our decision that they should avoid food offered to idols, and blood, and the flesh of strangled animals, and impurity.’
ACT 21:26 Paul joined the men, and the next day shared their purification, and went into the Temple, and gave notice of the expiration of the period of purification when the usual offering should have been made on behalf of each of them.
ACT 21:27 But, just as the seven days were drawing to a close, some of the Jewish people from Roman Asia caught sight of Paul in the Temple, and caused great excitement among all the people present, by seizing Paul and shouting,
ACT 21:28 ‘People of Israel! Help! This is the man who teaches everyone everywhere against our people, our Law, and this place; and, what is more, he has actually brought Greeks into the Temple and defiled this sacred place.’
ACT 21:29 (For they had previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian in Paul’s company in the city, and were under the belief that Paul had taken him into the Temple.)
ACT 21:30 The whole city was stirred, and the people quickly collected, seized Paul, and dragged him out of the Temple, when the doors were immediately shut.
ACT 21:31 They were bent on killing him, when it was reported to the officer commanding the garrison, that all Jerusalem was in commotion.
ACT 21:32 He instantly got together some officers and soldiers, and charged down on the crowd, who, when they saw the commanding officer and his soldiers, stopped beating Paul.
ACT 21:33 Then he went up to Paul, arrested him, ordered him to be doubly chained, and proceeded to inquire who he was, and what he had been doing.
ACT 21:34 Some of the crowd said one thing, and some another; and, as he could get no definite reply because of the uproar, he ordered Paul to be taken into the barracks.
ACT 21:35 When Paul reached the steps, he was actually being carried by the soldiers, owing to the violence of the mob;
ACT 21:36 for the people were following in a mass, shouting out, ‘Kill him!’
ACT 21:37 Just as he was about to be taken into the Fort, Paul said to the commanding officer, ‘May I speak to you?’ ‘Do you know Greek?’ asked the commanding officer.
ACT 21:38 ‘Aren’t you, then, the Egyptian who some time ago raised an insurrection and led the four thousand Bandits out into the wilderness?’
ACT 21:39 ‘No,’ said Paul, ‘I am a Jew of Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of a city of some note. I beg you to give me permission to speak to the people.’
ACT 21:40 The commanding officer gave his permission, and Paul, standing on the steps, made signs with his hand to the people, and, when comparative silence had been obtained, he said to them in Hebrew:
ACT 22:1 ‘Brothers and fathers, listen to the defence which I am about to make.’
ACT 22:2 When they heard that he was speaking to them in Hebrew, they were still more quiet; and Paul went on:
ACT 22:3 ‘I am a Jew, from Tarsus in Cilicia, but I was brought up in this city under the teaching of Gamaliel, and educated in accordance with the strict system of our ancestral Law. I was as zealous in God’s service as any of you who are here today.
ACT 22:4 In my persecution of this Way I did not stop even at the taking of life. I put in chains, and imprisoned, men and women alike –
ACT 22:5 And to that the high priest himself and all the council of elders can testify. For I had letters of introduction from them to our fellow Jews at Damascus, and I was on my way to that place, to bring those whom I might find there prisoners to Jerusalem for punishment.
ACT 22:6 While I was still on my way, just as I was getting close to Damascus, about midday, suddenly there flashed from the heavens a great light all round me.
ACT 22:7 I fell to the ground, and heard a voice saying to me “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?”
ACT 22:8 “Who are you, Lord?” I replied. Then the voice said “I am Jesus of Nazareth whom you are persecuting.”
ACT 22:9 The men with me saw the light, but did not hear the speaker’s voice.
ACT 22:10 Then I said “What am I to do, Lord?” “Get up and go into Damascus,” The Lord said to me, “and there you will be told all that you have been appointed to do.”
ACT 22:11 In consequence of that dazzling light I could not see, but my companions held me by the hand, until I reached Damascus.
ACT 22:12 There a man named Ananias, a strict observer of our Law, well spoken of by all the Jewish inhabitants, came to see me.
ACT 22:13 Standing close to me, he said “Saul, my brother, recover your sight.” And then and there I recovered my sight and looked up at him.
ACT 22:14 Then he said “The God of our ancestors has appointed you to learn his will, and to see the righteous one, and to hear words from his lips;
ACT 22:15 for you will be a witness for him to all the world of what you have just seen and heard.
ACT 22:16 And now why wait any longer, Be baptised at once, wash away your sins, and invoke his name.”
ACT 22:17 After my return to Jerusalem, while I was praying one day in the Temple, I fell into a trance,
ACT 22:18 and saw Jesus saying to me “Make haste and leave Jerusalem at once, because they will not accept your testimony about me.”
ACT 22:19 “Lord,” I answered, “these people know that I used to imprison and scourge, in synagogue after synagogue, those who believed in you;
ACT 22:20 and, when the blood of your martyr, Stephen, was being shed, I was myself standing by, approving of his death, and took charge of the clothes of those who were murdering him.”
ACT 22:21 But Jesus said to me “Go; for I will send you to the Gentiles far away”.’
ACT 22:22 Up to this point the people had been listening to Paul, but at these words they called out, ‘Kill him! A fellow like this ought not to have been allowed to live!’
ACT 22:23 As they were shouting, tearing off their clothes, and throwing dust in the air,
ACT 22:24 the commanding officer ordered Paul to be taken into the Fort, and directed that he should be examined under the lash so that he might find out the reason for their outcry against him.
ACT 22:25 But just as they had tied him up to be scourged, Paul said to the centurion standing near, ‘Is it legal for you to scourge a Roman citizen, unconvicted?’
ACT 22:26 On hearing this, the centurion went and reported it to the commanding officer. ‘Do you know what you are doing?’ he said. ‘This man is a Roman citizen.’
ACT 22:27 So the commanding officer went up to Paul and said, ‘Tell me, are you a Roman citizen?’ ‘Yes,’ replied Paul.
ACT 22:28 ‘I had to pay a heavy price for my position as citizen,’ said the officer. ‘I am one by birth,’ rejoined Paul.
ACT 22:29 The men who were to have examined Paul immediately drew back, and the officer, finding that Paul was a Roman citizen, was alarmed at having put him in chains.
ACT 22:30 On the next day the commanding officer, wishing to find out the real reason why Paul was denounced by the Jewish leaders, had his chains taken off, and directed the chief priests and the whole of the High Council to assemble, and then took Paul down and brought him before them.
ACT 23:1 Paul fixed his eyes on the Council, and began: ‘Brothers, for my part, I have always ordered my life before God, with a clear conscience, up to this very day.’
ACT 23:2 At this, the high priest Ananias ordered the men standing near to strike him on the mouth;
ACT 23:3 Paul turned to him and said: ‘God will strike you, you whitewashed wall! Are you sitting there to try me in accordance with law, and yet, in defiance of law, order me to be struck?’
ACT 23:4 The people standing near said to Paul, ‘Do you know that you are insulting God’s high priest?’
ACT 23:5 ‘I did not know, brothers, that it was the high priest,’ said Paul, ‘for scripture says – “Of the ruler of your people you should speak no ill”.’
ACT 23:6 Noticing that some of those present were Sadducees and others Pharisees, Paul called out in the Council, ‘Brothers, I am a Pharisee and a son of Pharisees. It is on the question of hope for the dead and of their resurrection that I am on my trial.’
ACT 23:7 As soon as he said this, a dispute arose between the Pharisees and the Sadducees; and there was a sharp division of opinion among those present.
ACT 23:8 (For Sadducees say there is no such thing as a resurrection, and that there is neither angel nor spirit, while Pharisees believe in both.)
ACT 23:9 So a great uproar ensued, and some of the Teachers of the Law belonging to the Pharisees’ party stood up and hotly protested, ‘We find nothing whatever wrong in this man. Suppose a spirit did speak to him, or an angel…’
ACT 23:10 The dispute was becoming so violent, that the commanding officer, fearing that Paul would be torn in pieces between them, ordered the Guard to go down and rescue him from them, and take him into the Fort.
ACT 23:11 That night the Lord came and stood by Paul, and said, ‘Courage! You have borne witness for me in Jerusalem and you must bear witness in Rome also.’
ACT 23:12 In the morning some Jewish men combined together, and took an oath that they would not eat or drink until they had killed Paul.
ACT 23:13 There were more than forty in the plot;
ACT 23:14 and they went to the chief priests and the elders, and said, ‘We have taken a solemn oath not to touch food until we have killed Paul.
ACT 23:15 So we want you now, with the consent of the Council, to suggest to the commanding officer that he should bring Paul down before you, as though you intended to go more fully into his case; but, before he comes here, we will be ready to make away with him.’
ACT 23:16 However, the son of Paul’s sister, hearing of the plot, went to the Fort, and on being admitted, told Paul about it.
ACT 23:17 Paul called one of the garrison centurion and asked him to take the young man to the commanding officer, as he had something to tell him.
ACT 23:18 The centurion went with him to the commanding officer, and said, ‘The prisoner Paul called me and asked me to bring this young man to you, as he has something to tell you.’
ACT 23:19 The commanding officer took the young man by the hand, and, stepping aside, asked what it was he had to tell him.
ACT 23:20 ‘Some men have agreed,’ he answered, ‘to ask you to bring Paul down before the Council tomorrow, on the plea of your making further inquiry into his case.
ACT 23:21 But do not let them persuade you, for more than forty of them are lying in wait for him, who have taken an oath that they will not eat or drink, until they have made away with him; and they are at this very moment in readiness, counting on your promise.’
ACT 23:22 The commanding officer then dismissed the young man, cautioning him not to mention to anybody that he had given him that information.
ACT 23:23 Then he called two Captains, and ordered them to have two hundred soldiers ready to go to Caesarea, as well as seventy troopers and two hundred lancers, by nine o’clock that night,
ACT 23:24 and to have horses ready for Paul to ride, so that they might take him safely to Felix, the Governor.
ACT 23:25 He also wrote a letter along these lines:
ACT 23:26 “Claudius Lysias sends his compliments to His Excellency Felix the Governor.
ACT 23:27 The man whom I send with this had been seized by some Jews, and was on the point of being killed by them, when I came upon them with the force under my command, and rescued him, as I learned that he was a Roman citizen.
ACT 23:28 Wanting to know exactly the ground of the charges they made against him, I brought him before their Council,
ACT 23:29 when I found that their charges were connected with questions of their own Law, and that there was nothing alleged involving either death or imprisonment.
ACT 23:30 Having, however, information of a plot against the man, which was about to be put into execution, I am sending him to you at once, and I have also directed his accusers to prosecute him before you.”
ACT 23:31 The soldiers, in accordance with their orders, took charge of Paul and conducted him by night to Antipatris;
ACT 23:32 and on the next day, leaving the troopers to go on with him, they returned to the Fort.
ACT 23:33 On arriving at Caesarea, the troopers delivered the letter to the Governor, and brought Paul before him.
ACT 23:34 As soon as Felix had read the letter, he enquired to what province Paul belonged, and, learning that he came from Cilicia, he said,
ACT 23:35 ‘I will hear all you have to say as soon as your accusers have arrived.’ And he ordered Paul to be kept under guard in Herod’s Government house.
ACT 24:1 Five days afterwards the high priest Ananias came down with some of the elders and a barrister named Tertullus. They laid an information with the Governor against Paul;
ACT 24:2 and, when the hearing came on, Tertullus began his speech for the prosecution.
ACT 24:3 ‘We owe it to your Excellency,’ he said, ‘that we are enjoying profound peace, and we owe it to your foresight that this nation is constantly securing reforms – advantages which we very gratefully accept at all times and places.
ACT 24:4 But – not to be tedious – I beg you, with your accustomed fairness, to listen to a brief statement of our case.
ACT 24:5 We have found this man a public pest; he is one who stirs up disputes among our people all the world over, and is a ringleader of the Nazarene heretics.
ACT 24:6 He even attempted to desecrate the Temple itself, but we caught him;
ACT 24:7 
ACT 24:8 and you will be able, by examining him on all these points, to satisfy yourself as to the charges which we are bringing against him.’
ACT 24:9 The Jewish crowd also joined in the attack and bore out his statements.
ACT 24:10 On a sign from the Governor, Paul made this reply: ‘Knowing, as I do, for how many years you have acted as judge to this nation, it is with confidence that I undertake my own defence.
ACT 24:11 For you can easily verify that it is not more than twelve days ago that I went up to worship at Jerusalem,
ACT 24:12 where my prosecutors never found me holding discussions with anyone, or causing a crowd to collect – either in the Temple, or in the synagogues, or about the city;
ACT 24:13 and they cannot establish the charges which they are now making against me.
ACT 24:14 This, however, I do acknowledge to you, that it is as a believer in the Way which they call heretical, that I worship the God of my ancestors. At the same time, I believe everything that is in accordance with the Law and that is written in the prophets;
ACT 24:15 and I have a hope that rests in God – a hope which they also cherish – that there will one day be a resurrection of good and bad alike.
ACT 24:16 This being so, I strive at all times to keep my conscience clear before both God and people.
ACT 24:17 After some years’ absence I had come to bring charitable gifts to my nation, and to make offerings;
ACT 24:18 and it was while engaged in this that they found me in the Temple, after completing a period of purification, but not with any crowd or disorder.
ACT 24:19 There were, however, some Jews from Roman Asia who ought to have been here before you, and to have made any charge that they may have against me –
ACT 24:20 Or else let my opponents here say what they found wrong in me when I was before the Council,
ACT 24:21 except as to the one sentence that I shouted out as I stood among them – “It is about the resurrection of the dead that I am on my trial before you today”.’
ACT 24:22 Felix, however, adjourned the case – though he had a fairly accurate knowledge of all that concerned the Way – with the promise, ‘When Lysias, the commanding officer, comes down, I will give my decision in your case.’
ACT 24:23 So he gave orders to the centurion in charge of Paul to keep him in custody, but to relax the regulations, and not to prevent any of his personal friends from attending to his wants.
ACT 24:24 Some days later Felix came with his wife Drusilla, who was Jewish, and, sending for Paul, listened to what he had to say about faith in Christ Jesus.
ACT 24:25 But, while Paul was speaking at length about righteousness, self-control, and the coming judgment, Felix became terrified, and interrupted him – ‘Go for the present, but, when I find an opportunity, I will send for you again.’
ACT 24:26 He was hoping, too, for a bribe from Paul, and so he used to send for him frequently and talk with him.
ACT 24:27 But, after the lapse of two years, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus; and, wishing to gain popularity with the Jewish leaders, he left Paul a prisoner.
ACT 25:1 Three days after Festus had arrived in his province, he left Caesarea and went up to Jerusalem.
ACT 25:2 There the chief priests and the leading men among the Jews laid an information before him against Paul,
ACT 25:3 and asked a favour of him, to Paul’s injury – to have Paul brought to Jerusalem. All the while they were plotting to make away with him on the road.
ACT 25:4 But Festus answered that Paul was in prison at Caesarea, and that he himself would be leaving for that place shortly.
ACT 25:5 ‘So let the influential men among you,’ he said, ‘go down with me, and if there is anything amiss in the man, charge him formally with it.’
ACT 25:6 After staying among them some eight or ten days, Festus went down to Caesarea. The next day he took his seat on the Bench, and ordered Paul to be brought before him.
ACT 25:7 On Paul’s appearance, the Jewish leaders who had come down from Jerusalem surrounded him, and made many serious charges, which they failed to establish.
ACT 25:8 Paul’s answer to the charge was – “I have not committed any offence against the Jewish Law, or the Temple, or the Emperor.”
ACT 25:9 But, as Festus wished to gain popularity with the Jews, he interrupted Paul with the question, ‘Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem and be tried on these charges before me there?’
ACT 25:10 ‘No,’ replied Paul, ‘I am standing at the Emperor’s court, where I ought to be tried. I have not wronged the Jews, as you yourself are well aware.
ACT 25:11 If, however, I am breaking the law and have committed any offence deserving death, I do not ask to escape the penalty; but, if there is nothing in the accusations of these people, no one has the power to give me up to them. I appeal to the Emperor.’
ACT 25:12 Festus, after conferring with his Council, answered, ‘You have appealed to the Emperor; to the Emperor you will go.’
ACT 25:13 Some days later King Agrippa and Bernice came down to Caesarea, and paid a visit of congratulation to Festus;
ACT 25:14 and, as they were staying there for several days, Festus laid Paul’s case before the king. ‘There is a man here,’ he said, ‘left a prisoner by Felix,
ACT 25:15 about whom, when I came to Jerusalem, the Jewish chief priest and the elders laid an information, demanding judgment against him.
ACT 25:16 My answer to them was, that it was not the practice of Romans to give up anyone to their accusers until the accused had met them face to face, and had also had an opportunity of answering the charges brought against them.
ACT 25:17 So they met here, and without loss of time I took my seat on the Bench the very next day, and ordered the man to be brought before me.
ACT 25:18 But, when his accusers came forward, they brought no charge of wrongdoing such as I had expected;
ACT 25:19 but I found that there were certain questions in dispute between them about their own religion, and about some dead man called Jesus, whom Paul declared to be alive.
ACT 25:20 And, as I was at a loss how to enquire into questions of this kind, I asked Paul if he were willing to go up to Jerusalem, and be put on trial there.
ACT 25:21 Paul, however, appealed to have his case reserved for the consideration of his August Majesty, so I ordered him to be detained in custody, until I could send him to the Emperor.’
ACT 25:22 ‘I should like to hear this man myself,’ Agrippa said to Festus. ‘You will hear him tomorrow,’ Festus answered.
ACT 25:23 So the next day, when Agrippa and Bernice had come in full state and had entered the Audience Chamber, with the superior officers and the principal people of the city, by the order of Festus Paul was brought before them.
ACT 25:24 Then Festus said, ‘King Agrippa, and all here present, you see before you the man about whom the whole Jewish people have applied to me, both at Jerusalem and here, loudly asserting that he ought not to be allowed to live.
ACT 25:25 I found, however, that he had not done anything deserving death; so, as he had himself appealed to his August Majesty, I decided to send him.
ACT 25:26 But I have nothing definite to write about him to my Imperial Master; and for that reason I have brought him before you all, and especially before you, King Agrippa, that, after examining him, I may have something to write.
ACT 25:27 For it seems to me absurd to send a prisoner, without at the same time stating the charges made against him.’
ACT 26:1 Turning to Paul, Agrippa said, ‘You are at liberty to speak for yourself.’ Then Paul stretched out his hand and began his defence.
ACT 26:2 ‘I have been congratulating myself, King Agrippa,’ he said, ‘that it is before you that I have to make my defence today, with regard to all the charges brought against me by my own people,
ACT 26:3 especially as you are so well-versed in all the customs and questions of the Jewish world. I beg you therefore to give me a patient hearing.
ACT 26:4 My life, then, from youth upwards, was passed, from the very first, among my own nation, and in Jerusalem, and is within the knowledge of all Jews;
ACT 26:5 and they have always known – if they choose to give evidence – that, in accordance with the very strictest form of our religion, I lived a true Pharisee.
ACT 26:6 Even now, it is because of my hope in the promise given by God to our ancestors that I stand here on my trial –
ACT 26:7 A promise which our twelve tribes, by earnest service night and day, hope to see fulfilled. It is for this hope, your Majesty, that I am accused – and by Jews themselves!
ACT 26:8 Why do you all hold it incredible that God should raise the dead?
ACT 26:9 I myself, it is true, once thought it my duty to oppose in every way the name of Jesus of Nazareth;
ACT 26:10 and I actually did so at Jerusalem. Acting on the authority of the chief priests, I myself threw many of the people of Christ into prison, and, when it was proposed to put them to death, I gave my vote for it.
ACT 26:11 Time after time, in every synagogue, I tried by punishments to force them to blaspheme. So frantic was I against them, that I pursued them even to towns beyond our borders.
ACT 26:12 It was while I was traveling to Damascus on an errand of this kind, entrusted with full powers by the chief priests,
ACT 26:13 that at midday, your Majesty, I saw right in my path, coming from the heavens, a light brighter than the glare of the sun, which shone all round me and those traveling with me.
ACT 26:14 We all fell to the ground, and then I heard a voice saying to me in Hebrew – “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? By kicking against the goad you are punishing yourself.”
ACT 26:15 “Who are you, Lord?” I asked. And the Lord said, “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting;
ACT 26:16 but get up and stand upright; for I have appeared to you in order to appoint you a servant and a witness of those revelations of me which you have already had, and of those in which I will yet appear to you,
ACT 26:17 since I am choosing you out from your own people and from the Gentiles, to whom I now send you,
ACT 26:18 to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God; so that they may receive pardon for their sins, and a place among those who have become God’s people, by faith in me.”
ACT 26:19 After that, King Agrippa, I did not fail to obey the heavenly vision;
ACT 26:20 on the contrary, first to those at Damascus and Jerusalem, and then through the whole of Judea, and to the Gentiles as well, I began to preach repentance and conversion to God, and a life befitting that repentance.
ACT 26:21 This is why some men seized me in the Temple, and made attempts on my life.
ACT 26:22 However I have received help from God to this very day, and so stand here, and bear my testimony to high and low alike – without adding a word to what the prophets, as well as Moses, declared should happen –
ACT 26:23 That the Christ must suffer, and that, by rising from the dead, he was destined to be the first to bring news of light, not only to our nation, but also to the Gentiles.’
ACT 26:24 While Paul was making this defence, Festus called out loudly, ‘You are mad, Paul; your great learning is driving you mad.’
ACT 26:25 ‘I am not mad, your Excellency,’ he replied. ‘On the contrary, the statements that I am making are true and sober.
ACT 26:26 Indeed, the king knows about these matters, so I speak before him without constraint. I am sure that there is nothing whatever of what I have been telling him that has escaped his attention; for all this has not been done in a corner.
ACT 26:27 King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know you do.’
ACT 26:28 But Agrippa said to Paul, ‘You are soon trying to make a Christian of me!’
ACT 26:29 ‘Whether it is soon or late,’ answered Paul, ‘I pray to God that not only you, but all who are listening to me, might today become just what I am myself – except for these chains!’
ACT 26:30 Then the king rose, with the Governor and Bernice and those who had been sitting with them,
ACT 26:31 and, after retiring, discussed the case among themselves. ‘There is nothing,’ they said, ‘deserving death or imprisonment in this man’s conduct’;
ACT 26:32 and, speaking to Festus, Agrippa added, ‘The man might have been discharged, if he had not appealed to the Emperor.’
ACT 27:1 As it was decided that we were to sail to Italy, Paul and some other prisoners were put in charge of a centurion of the Augustan Guard, named Julius.
ACT 27:2 We went on board a ship from Adramyttium, which was on the point of sailing to the ports along the coast of Roman Asia, and put to sea. Aristarchus, a Macedonian from Thessalonica, went with us.
ACT 27:3 The next day we put in to Sidon, where Julius treated Paul in a friendly manner, and allowed him to go to see his friends and receive their hospitality.
ACT 27:4 Putting to sea again, we sailed under the lee of Cyprus, because the wind was against us;
ACT 27:5 and, after crossing the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we reached Myra in Lycia.
ACT 27:6 There the Roman officer found an Alexandrian ship on her way to Italy, and put us on board of her.
ACT 27:7 For several days our progress was slow, and it was only with difficulty that we arrived off Cnidus. As the wind was still unfavourable when we came off Cape Salmone, we sailed under the lee of Crete,
ACT 27:8 and with difficulty, by keeping close in shore, we reached a place called “Fair Havens,” near which was the town of Lasea.
ACT 27:9 This had taken a considerable time, and sailing was already dangerous, for the Fast was already over; and so Paul gave this warning.
ACT 27:10 ‘My friends,’ he said, ‘I see that this voyage will be attended with injury and much damage, not only to the cargo and the ship, but to our own lives also.’
ACT 27:11 The Roman officer, however, was more influenced by the captain and the owner than by what was said by Paul.
ACT 27:12 And, as the harbour was not a suitable one to winter in, the majority were in favour of continuing the voyage, in hope of being able to reach Phoenix, and winter there. Phoenix was a Cretan harbour, open to the north-east and south-east.
ACT 27:13 So, when a light wind sprang up from the south, thinking that they had found their opportunity, they weighed anchor and kept along the coast of Crete, close in shore.
ACT 27:14 But shortly afterwards a hurricane came down on us off the land – a north-easter, as it is called.
ACT 27:15 The ship was caught by it and was unable to keep her head to the wind, so we had to give way and let her drive before it.
ACT 27:16 Running under the lee of a small island called Cauda, we only just managed to secure the ship’s boat,
ACT 27:17 and, after hoisting it on board, the men frapped the ship. But, afraid of being driven on to the Syrtis Sands, they lowered the yard, and then drifted.
ACT 27:18 So violently were we tossed about by the storm, that the next day they began throwing the cargo overboard,
ACT 27:19 and, on the following day, threw out the ship’s tackle with their own hands.
ACT 27:20 As neither sun nor stars were visible for several days, and, as the gale still continued severe, all hope of our being saved was at last abandoned.
ACT 27:21 It was then, when they had gone a long time without food, that Paul came forward, and said, ‘My friends, you should have listened to me, and not have sailed from Crete and so incurred this injury and damage.
ACT 27:22 Yet, even as things are, I beg you not to lose courage, for there will not be a single life lost among you – only the ship.
ACT 27:23 For last night an angel of the God to whom I belong, and whom I serve, stood by me, and said –
ACT 27:24 “Have no fear, Paul; you must appear before the Emperor, and God himself has given you the lives of all your fellow voyagers.”
ACT 27:25 Therefore, courage, my friends! For I believe God, that everything will happen exactly as I have been told.
ACT 27:26 We will, however, have to be driven on some island.’
ACT 27:27 It was now the fourteenth night of the storm, and we were drifting about in the Adriatic Sea, when, about midnight, the sailors began to suspect that they were drawing near land.
ACT 27:28 So they took soundings, and found twenty fathoms of water. After waiting a little, they took soundings again, and found fifteen fathoms.
ACT 27:29 Then, as they were afraid of our being driven on some rocky coast, they let go four anchors from the stern, and longed for daylight.
ACT 27:30 The sailors wanted to leave the ship, and had lowered the boat, on pretence of running out anchors from the bows,
ACT 27:31 when Paul said to the Roman officer and his men, ‘Unless the sailors remain on board, you cannot be saved.’
ACT 27:32 So the soldiers cut the ropes which held the boat, and let her drift away.
ACT 27:33 In the interval before daybreak Paul kept urging them all to take something to eat. ‘It is a fortnight today,’ he said, ‘that, owing to your anxiety, you have gone without food, taking nothing.
ACT 27:34 So I beg you to take something to eat; your safety depends on it, for not one of you will lose even a hair of his head.’
ACT 27:35 With these words he took some bread, and, after saying the thanksgiving to God before them all, broke it in pieces, and began to eat;
ACT 27:36 and the men all felt cheered and had something to eat themselves.
ACT 27:37 There were about seventy-six of us on board, all told.
ACT 27:38 After satisfying their hunger, they further lightened the ship by throwing the grain into the sea.
ACT 27:39 When daylight came, they could not make out what land it was, but, observing a creek in which there was a beach, they consulted as to whether they could run the ship safely into it.
ACT 27:40 Then they cast off, and abandoned the anchors, and at the same time unlashed the gear of the steering oars, hoisted the foresail to the wind, and made for the beach.
ACT 27:41 They got, however, into a kind of channel, and there ran the ship aground. The bows stuck fast and could not be moved, while the stern began breaking up under the strain.
ACT 27:42 The advice of the soldiers was that the prisoners should be killed, so that none of them could swim away and make their escape.
ACT 27:43 But the Roman officer, anxious to save Paul, prevented their carrying out their intention, and ordered that those who could swim should be the first to jump into the sea and try to reach the shore;
ACT 27:44 and that the rest should follow, some on planks, and others on different pieces of the ship. In these various ways everyone managed to get safely ashore.
ACT 28:1 When we were all safe, we found that the island was called Malta.
ACT 28:2 The island’s people showed us marked kindness, for they lit a fire and took us all under shelter, because it had come on to rain and was cold.
ACT 28:3 Paul had gathered a quantity of dry sticks and laid them on the fire, when a poisonous snake, driven out by the heat, fastened on his hand.
ACT 28:4 When the islanders saw the creature hanging from his hand, they said to one another, ‘Evidently this man is a murderer, for though he has been saved from the sea, Justice has not allowed him to live.’
ACT 28:5 However, Paul shook the creature off into the fire and took no harm.
ACT 28:6 The islanders were expecting inflammation to set in, or that he would suddenly fall dead; but, after waiting for a long time, and seeing that there was nothing amiss with him, they changed their minds and said that he was a God.
ACT 28:7 In that region there was an estate belonging to the Governor of the island, whose name was Publius. He took us up to his house, and for three days entertained us most courteously.
ACT 28:8 It happened that the father of Publius was lying ill of fever and dysentery. So Paul went to see him; and, after praying, he placed his hands on him and cured him.
ACT 28:9 After this, all the people in the island who had any illness came to Paul, and were cured.
ACT 28:10 They also presented us with many gifts, and when we set sail they put supplies of necessaries on board.
ACT 28:11 After three months, we set sail in a ship that had wintered in the island. She was an Alexandrian vessel, and had the Twin sons of Zeus for her figure-head.
ACT 28:12 We put in at Syracuse and stayed there three days,
ACT 28:13 and from there we worked to windward and so got to Rhegium. A day later a south wind sprang up and took us to Puteoli in two days.
ACT 28:14 There we found some of the Lord’s followers, and were urged to stay a week with them; after which we went on to Rome.
ACT 28:15 The followers there had heard about us, and came out as far as the Market of Appius and the Three Taverns to meet us. At sight of them Paul thanked God and was much cheered.
ACT 28:16 On our reaching Rome, Paul was allowed to live by himself, except for the soldier who was in charge of him.
ACT 28:17 Three days after our arrival, Paul invited the leading Jews to meet him; and, when they came, he said, ‘Brothers, although I had done nothing hostile to the interests of our nation or to our ancestral customs, yet I was sent from Jerusalem as a prisoner, and handed over to the Romans.
ACT 28:18 The Romans, when they had examined me, were ready to release me, because there was nothing in my conduct deserving death.
ACT 28:19 But, as the Jewish leaders opposed my release, I was compelled to appeal to the Emperor – not, indeed, that I had any charge to make against my own nation.
ACT 28:20 This, then, is my reason for urging you to come to see me and talk with me; because it is for the sake of the hope of Israel that I am here in chains.’
ACT 28:21 ‘We,’ was their reply, ‘have not had any letter about you from Judea, nor have any of our fellow Jews come and reported or said anything bad about you.
ACT 28:22 But we will be glad to hear from you what your views are, for, with regard to this sect, we are well aware that it is spoken against on all sides.’
ACT 28:23 They then fixed a day with him, and came to the place where he was staying, in even larger numbers, when Paul proceeded to lay the subject before them. He bore his testimony to the kingdom of God, and tried to convince them about Jesus, by arguments drawn from the Law of Moses and from the prophets – speaking from morning until evening.
ACT 28:24 Some were inclined to accept what he said; others, however, rejected it.
ACT 28:25 So, as they disagreed among themselves, they began to disperse, Paul adding only – ‘True, indeed, was the declaration made by the Holy Spirit, through the prophet Isaiah to your ancestors –
ACT 28:26 Go to this nation and say: You will hear with your ears without ever understanding, and, though you have eyes, you will see without ever perceiving.
ACT 28:27 For the mind of this nation has grown dense, and their ears are dull of hearing, their eyes also have they closed; otherwise some day they might see with their eyes, and with their ears they might hear, and in their mind they might understand, and might turn – and I might heal them.
ACT 28:28 Understand, then, that this salvation of God was sent for the Gentiles; and they will listen.’
ACT 28:29 
ACT 28:30 For two whole years Paul stayed in a house which he rented for himself, welcoming all who came to see him,
ACT 28:31 proclaiming the kingdom of God, and teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ, with perfect fearlessness, unhindered.
ROM 1:1 From Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, who has been called to become an apostle, and has been set apart to tell God’s good news.
ROM 1:2 This good news God promised long ago through his prophets in the sacred scriptures,
ROM 1:3 concerning his Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord; who, as to his human nature, was descended from David,
ROM 1:4 but, as to the spirit of holiness within him, was miraculously designated Son of God by his resurrection from the dead.
ROM 1:5 Through him we received the gift of the apostolic office, to win submission to the faith among all nations for the glory of his name.
ROM 1:6 And among these nations are you – you who have been called to belong to Jesus Christ.
ROM 1:7 To all in Rome who are dear to God and have been called to become Christ’s people, may God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace.
ROM 1:8 First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, because the report of your faith is spreading throughout the world.
ROM 1:9 God, to whom I offer the worship of my soul as I tell the goodness of his Son, is my witness how constantly I mention you when I pray,
ROM 1:10 asking that, if he be willing, I may some day at last find the way open to visit you.
ROM 1:11 For I long to see you, in order to impart to you some spiritual gift and so give you fresh strength –
ROM 1:12 or rather that both you and I may find encouragement in each other’s faith.
ROM 1:13 I want you to know, my friends, that I have many times intended coming to see you – but until now I have been prevented – that I might find among you some fruit of my labours, as I have already among the other nations.
ROM 1:14 I have a duty to both the Greek and the barbarian, to both the cultured and the ignorant.
ROM 1:15 And so, for my part, I am ready to tell the good news to you also who are in Rome.
ROM 1:16 For I am not ashamed of the good news; it is the power of God which brings salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew first, but also to the Greek.
ROM 1:17 For in it there is a revelation of the divine righteousness resulting from faith and leading on to faith; as scripture says – “Through faith the righteous will find life.”
ROM 1:18 So, too, there is a revelation from heaven of the divine wrath against every form of ungodliness and wickedness on the part of those people who, by their wicked lives, are stifling the truth.
ROM 1:19 This is so, because what can be known about God is plain to them; for God himself has made it plain.
ROM 1:20 For ever since the creation of the universe God’s invisible attributes – his everlasting power and divinity – are to be seen and studied in his works, so that people have no excuse;
ROM 1:21 because, although they learned to know God, yet they did not offer him as God either praise or thanksgiving. Their speculations about him proved futile, and their undiscerning minds were darkened.
ROM 1:22 Professing to be wise, they showed themselves fools;
ROM 1:23 and they transformed the glory of the immortal God into the likeness of mortal humans, and of birds, and beasts, and reptiles.
ROM 1:24 Therefore God abandoned them to impurity, letting them follow the cravings of their hearts, until they dishonoured their own bodies;
ROM 1:25 for they had substituted a lie for the truth about God, and had reverenced and worshiped created things more than the Creator, who is to be praised for ever. Amen.
ROM 1:26 That, I say, is why God abandoned them to degrading passions. Even the women among them perverted the natural use of their bodies to the unnatural;
ROM 1:27 while the men, disregarding that for which women were intended by nature, were consumed with passion for one another. Men indulged in vile practices with men, and incurred in their own persons the inevitable penalty for their perverseness.
ROM 1:28 Then, as they would not keep God before their minds, God abandoned them to depraved thoughts, so that they did all kinds of shameful things.
ROM 1:29 They revelled in every form of wickedness, evil, greed, vice. Their lives were full of envy, murder, quarrelling, treachery, malice.
ROM 1:30 They became back-biters, slanderers, impious, insolent, boastful. They devised new sins. They disobeyed their parents.
ROM 1:31 They were undiscerning, untrustworthy, without natural affection or pity.
ROM 1:32 Well aware of God’s decree, that those who do such things deserve to die, not only are they guilty of them themselves, but they even applaud those who do them.
ROM 2:1 Therefore you have nothing to say in your own defence, whoever you are who set yourself up as a judge. In judging others you condemn yourself, for you who set yourself up as a judge do the very same things.
ROM 2:2 And we know that God’s judgment falls unerringly on those who do them.
ROM 2:3 You who judge those that do such things and yet are yourself guilty of them – do you suppose that you of all people will escape God’s judgment?
ROM 2:4 Or do you think lightly of his abundant kindness, patience, and forbearance, not realising that his kindness is meant to lead you to repentance?
ROM 2:5 Hard-hearted and impenitent as you are, you are storing up for yourself wrath on the day of wrath, when God’s justice as a judge will be revealed;
ROM 2:6 for he will give to everyone what their actions deserve.
ROM 2:7 To those who, by perseverance in doing good, aim at glory, honour, and all that is imperishable, he will give immortal life;
ROM 2:8 while as to those who are factious, and disobedient to truth but obedient to evil, wrath and anger, distress and despair,
ROM 2:9 will fall on every human being who persists in wrongdoing – on the Jew first, but also on the Greek.
ROM 2:10 But there will be glory, honour, and peace for everyone who does right – for the Jew first, but also for the Greek,
ROM 2:11 since God shows no partiality.
ROM 2:12 All who, when they sin, are without Law will also perish without Law; while all who, when they sin, are under Law, will be judged as being under Law.
ROM 2:13 It is not those who hear the words of a Law that are righteous before God, but it is those who obey it that will be pronounced righteous.
ROM 2:14 When Gentiles, who have no Law, do instinctively what the Law requires, they, though they have no Law, are a Law to themselves;
ROM 2:15 for they show the demands of the Law written on their hearts; their consciences corroborating it, while in their thoughts they argue either in self-accusation or, it may be, in self-defence –
ROM 2:16 on the day when God passes judgment on people’s inmost lives, as the good news that I tell declares that he will do through Christ Jesus.
ROM 2:17 But, perhaps, you bear the name of “Jew,” and are relying on Law, and boast of belonging to God, and understand his will,
ROM 2:18 and, having been carefully instructed from the Law, have learned to appreciate the finer moral distinctions.
ROM 2:19 Perhaps you are confident that you are a guide to the blind, a light to those who are in the dark, an instructor of the unintelligent,
ROM 2:20 and a teacher of the childish, because in the Law you possess the outline of all knowledge and truth.
ROM 2:21 Why, then, you teacher of others, don’t you teach yourself? Do you preach against stealing, and yet steal?
ROM 2:22 Do you forbid adultery, and yet commit adultery? Do you loathe idols, and yet plunder temples?
ROM 2:23 Boasting, as you do, of your Law, do you dishonour God by breaking the Law?
ROM 2:24 For, as scripture says – “The Gentiles insult God’s name because of you”!
ROM 2:25 Circumcision has its value, if you are obeying the Law. But, if you are a breaker of the Law, your circumcision is no better than uncircumcision.
ROM 2:26 If, then, an uncircumcised man pays regard to the requirements of the Law, won’t he, although not circumcised, be regarded by God as if he were?
ROM 2:27 Indeed, the person who, owing to his birth, remains uncircumcised, and yet scrupulously obeys the Law, will condemn you, who, for all your written Law and your circumcision, are yet a breaker of the Law.
ROM 2:28 For a man who is only a Jew outwardly is not a real Jew; nor is outward bodily circumcision real circumcision. The real Jew is the person who is a Jew in soul;
ROM 2:29 and the real circumcision is the circumcision of the heart, a spiritual and not a literal thing. Such a person wins praise from God, though not from people.
ROM 3:1 What is the advantage, then, of being a Jew? Or what is the good of circumcision?
ROM 3:2 Great in every way. First of all, because the Jews were entrusted with God’s utterances.
ROM 3:3 What follows then? Some, no doubt, showed a want of faith; but will their want of faith make God break faith? Heaven forbid!
ROM 3:4 God must prove true, though everyone prove a liar! As scripture says of God – “That you may be pronounced righteous in what you say, and gain your cause when people would judge you.”
ROM 3:5 But what if our wrongdoing makes God’s righteousness all the clearer? Will God be wrong in inflicting punishment? (I can but speak as a person.) Heaven forbid!
ROM 3:6 Otherwise how can God judge the world?
ROM 3:7 But, if my falsehood redounds to the glory of God, by making his truthfulness more apparent, why am I like others, still condemned as a sinner?
ROM 3:8 Why should we not say – as some people slanderously assert that we do say – “Let us do evil that good may come”? The condemnation of such people is indeed just!
ROM 3:9 What follows, then? Are we Jews in any way superior to others? Not at all. Our indictment against both Jews and Greeks was that all alike were in subjection to sin.
ROM 3:10 As scripture says – “There is not even one who is righteous,
ROM 3:11 not one who understands, not one who is searching for God!
ROM 3:12 They have all gone astray; they have one and all become depraved; there is no one who is doing good – no, not one!”
ROM 3:13 “Their throats are like opened graves; they deceive with their tongues.” “The venom of snakes lies behind their lips,”
ROM 3:14 “And their mouths are full of bitter curses.”
ROM 3:15 “Swift are their feet to shed blood.
ROM 3:16 Distress and trouble dog their steps,
ROM 3:17 and the path of peace they do not know.”
ROM 3:18 “The fear of God is not before their eyes.”
ROM 3:19 Now we know that everything said in the Law is addressed to those who are under its authority, in order that every mouth may be closed, and to bring the whole world under God’s judgment.
ROM 3:20 For no human being will be pronounced righteous before God as the result of obedience to Law; for it is Law that shows what sin is.
ROM 3:21 But now, quite apart from Law, the divine righteousness stands revealed, and to it the Law and the prophets bear witness –
ROM 3:22 the divine righteousness which is bestowed, through faith in Jesus Christ, on all, without distinction, who believe in him.
ROM 3:23 For all have sinned, and all fall short of God’s glorious ideal,
ROM 3:24 but, in his loving kindness, are being freely pronounced righteous through the deliverance found in Christ Jesus.
ROM 3:25 For God set him before the world, to be, by the shedding of his blood, a means of reconciliation through faith. And this God did to prove his righteousness, and because, in his forbearance, he had passed over the sins that people had previously committed;
ROM 3:26 as a proof, I repeat, at the present time, of his own righteousness, that he might be righteous in our eyes, and might pronounce righteous the person who takes their stand on faith in Jesus.
ROM 3:27 What, then, becomes of our boasting? It is excluded. By what sort of Law? A Law requiring obedience? No, a Law requiring faith.
ROM 3:28 For we conclude that a person is pronounced righteous on the ground of faith, quite apart from obedience to Law.
ROM 3:29 Or can it be that God is the God only of the Jews? Isn’t he also the God of the Gentiles?
ROM 3:30 Yes, of the Gentiles also, since there is only one God, and he will pronounce those who are circumcised righteous as the result of faith, and also those who are uncircumcised on their showing the same faith.
ROM 3:31 Do we, then, use this faith to abolish Law? Heaven forbid! No, we establish Law.
ROM 4:1 What then, it may be asked, are we to say about Abraham, the ancestor of our nation?
ROM 4:2 If he was pronounced righteous as the result of obedience, then he has something to boast of. Yes, but not before God.
ROM 4:3 For what are the words of scripture? “Abraham had faith in God, and his faith was regarded by God as righteousness.”
ROM 4:4 Now wages are regarded as due to the person who works, not as a favour, but as a debt;
ROM 4:5 while, as for the person who does not rely on their obedience, but has faith in him who can pronounce the godless righteous, their faith is regarded by God as righteousness.
ROM 4:6 In precisely the same way David speaks of the blessing pronounced on the person who is regarded by God as righteous apart from actions –
ROM 4:7 “Blessed are those whose wrongdoings have been forgiven and over whose sins a veil has been drawn!
ROM 4:8 Blessed the man whom the Lord will never regard as sinful!”
ROM 4:9 Is this blessing, then, pronounced on the circumcised only or on the uncircumcised as well? We say that – “Abraham’s faith was regarded by God as righteousness.”
ROM 4:10 Under what circumstances, then, did this take place? After his circumcision or before it?
ROM 4:11 Not after, but before. And it was as a sign of this that he received the rite of circumcision – to show the righteousness due to the faith of an uncircumcised man – in order that he might be the father of all who have faith in God even when uncircumcised, so that they also may be regarded by God as righteous;
ROM 4:12 as well as father of the circumcised – to those who are not only circumcised, but who also follow our father Abraham in that faith which he had while still uncircumcised.
ROM 4:13 For the promise that he should inherit the world did not come to Abraham or his descendants through Law, but through the righteousness due to faith.
ROM 4:14 If those who take their stand on Law are to inherit the world, then faith is robbed of its meaning and the promise comes to nothing!
ROM 4:15 Law entails punishment; but, where no Law exists, no breach of it is possible.
ROM 4:16 That is why everything is made to depend on faith: so that everything may be God’s gift, and in order that the fulfilment of the promise may be made certain for all Abraham’s descendants – not only for those who take their stand on the Law, but also for those who take their stand on the faith of Abraham. (He is the father of us all;
ROM 4:17 as scripture says – “I have made you the father of many nations.”) And this they do in the sight of that God in whom Abraham had faith, and who gives life to the dead, and speaks of what does not yet exist as if it did.
ROM 4:18 With no ground for hope, Abraham, sustained by hope, put faith in God; in order that, in fulfilment of the words – “So many will your descendants be,” he might become “the father of many nations.”
ROM 4:19 Though he was nearly a hundred years old, yet his faith did not fail him, even when he thought of his own body, then utterly worn out, and remembered that Sarah was past bearing children.
ROM 4:20 He was not led by want of faith to doubt God’s promise.
ROM 4:21 On the contrary, his faith gave him strength; and he praised God, in the firm conviction that what God has promised he is also able to carry out.
ROM 4:22 And therefore his faith “was regarded as righteousness.”
ROM 4:23 Now these words – “it was regarded as righteousness” – were not written with reference to Abraham only;
ROM 4:24 but also with reference to us. Our faith, too, will be regarded by God in the same light, if we have faith in him who raised Jesus, our Lord, from the dead;
ROM 4:25 for Jesus was given up to death to atone for our offences, and was raised to life that we might be pronounced righteous.
ROM 5:1 Therefore, having been pronounced righteous as the result of faith, let us enjoy peace with God through Jesus Christ, our Lord.
ROM 5:2 It is through him that, by reason of our faith, we have obtained admission to that place in God’s favour in which we now stand. So let us exult in our hope of attaining God’s glorious ideal.
ROM 5:3 And not only that, but let us also exult in our troubles;
ROM 5:4 for we know that trouble develops endurance, and endurance strength of character, and strength of character hope,
ROM 5:5 and that hope never disappoints. For the love of God has filled our hearts through the Holy Spirit which was given us;
ROM 5:6 seeing that, while we were still powerless, Christ, in God’s good time, died on behalf of the godless.
ROM 5:7 Even for an upright person scarcely anyone will die. For a really good person perhaps someone might even dare to die.
ROM 5:8 But God puts his love for us beyond all doubt by the fact that Christ died on our behalf while we were still sinners.
ROM 5:9 Much more, then, now that we have been pronounced righteous by virtue of the shedding of his blood, will we be saved through him from the wrath of God.
ROM 5:10 For if, when we were God’s enemies, we were reconciled to him through the death of his Son, much more, now that we have become reconciled, will we be saved by virtue of Christ’s life.
ROM 5:11 And not only that, but we exult in God, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, through whom we have now obtained this reconciliation.
ROM 5:12 Therefore, just as sin came into the world through one man, and through sin came death; so, also, death spread to all humanity, because every person has sinned.
ROM 5:13 Even before the time of the Law there was sin in the world; but sin cannot be charged against someone where no Law exists.
ROM 5:14 Yet, from Adam to Moses, death reigned even over those whose sin was not a breach of a law, as Adam’s was. And Adam foreshadows the one to come.
ROM 5:15 But there is a contrast between Adam’s offence and God’s gracious gift. For, if by reason of the offence of the one man the whole human race died, far more were the loving kindness of God, and the gift given in the loving kindness of the one man, Jesus Christ, lavished on the whole human race.
ROM 5:16 There is a contrast, too, between the gift and the results of the one man’s sin. The judgment, which followed on the one man’s sin, resulted in condemnation, but God’s gracious gift, which followed on many offences, resulted in a decree of righteousness.
ROM 5:17 For if, by reason of the offence of the one man, death reigned through that one man, far more will those, on whom God’s loving kindness and his gift of righteousness are lavished, find life, and reign through the one man, Jesus Christ.
ROM 5:18 Briefly then, just as a single offence resulted for all humanity in condemnation, so, too, a single decree of righteousness resulted for all humanity in that declaration of righteousness which brings life.
ROM 5:19 For, as through the disobedience of the one man the whole human race was rendered sinful, so, too, through the obedience of the one, the whole human race will be rendered righteous.
ROM 5:20 Law was introduced in order that offences might be multiplied. But, where sins were multiplied, the loving kindness of God was lavished the more,
ROM 5:21 in order that, just as sin had reigned in the realm of death, so, too, might loving-kindness reign through righteousness, and result in eternal life, through Jesus Christ, our Lord.
ROM 6:1 What are we to say, then? Are we to continue to sin, in order that God’s loving kindness may be multiplied?
ROM 6:2 Heaven forbid! We became dead to sin, so how can we go on living in it?
ROM 6:3 Or can it be that you do not know that all of us, who were baptised into union with Christ Jesus, in our baptism shared his death?
ROM 6:4 Consequently, through sharing his death in our baptism, we were buried with him; so that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by a manifestation of the Father’s power, so we also may live a new life.
ROM 6:5 If we have become united with him by the act symbolic of his death, surely we will also become united with him by the act symbolic of his resurrection.
ROM 6:6 We recognise the truth that our old self was crucified with Christ, in order that the body, the stronghold of sin, might be rendered powerless, so that we should no longer be slaves to sin.
ROM 6:7 For the man who has so died has been pronounced righteous and released from sin.
ROM 6:8 And our belief is, that, as we have shared Christ’s death, we will also share his life.
ROM 6:9 We know, indeed, that Christ, having once risen from the dead, will not die again. Death has power over him no longer.
ROM 6:10 For the death that he died was a death to sin, once and for all. But the life that he now lives, he lives for God.
ROM 6:11 So let it be with you – regard yourselves as dead to sin, but as living for God, through union with Christ Jesus.
ROM 6:12 Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal bodies and compel you to obey its cravings.
ROM 6:13 Do not offer any part of your bodies to sin, in the cause of unrighteousness, but once for all offer yourselves to God (as those who, though once dead, now have life), and devote every part of your bodies to the cause of righteousness.
ROM 6:14 For sin will not lord it over you. You are living under the reign, not of Law, but of love.
ROM 6:15 What follows, then? Are we to sin because we are living under the reign of love and not of Law? Heaven forbid!
ROM 6:16 Surely you know that when you offer yourselves as servants, to obey anyone, you are the servants of the person whom you obey, whether the service be a service to sin which leads to death, or a service to duty which leads to righteousness.
ROM 6:17 God be thanked that, though you were once servants of sin, yet you learned to give hearty obedience to that form of doctrine under which you were placed.
ROM 6:18 Set free from the control of sin, you became servants to righteousness.
ROM 6:19 I can but speak as people do because of the weakness of your earthly nature. Once you offered every part of your bodies to the service of impurity, and of wickedness, which leads to further wickedness. Now, in the same way, offer them to the service of righteousness, which leads to holiness.
ROM 6:20 While you were still servants of sin, you were free as regards righteousness.
ROM 6:21 But what were the fruits that you reaped from those things of which you are now ashamed? For the end of such things is death.
ROM 6:22 But now that you have been set free from the control of sin, and have become servants to God, the fruit that you reap is an ever increasing holiness, and the end eternal life.
ROM 6:23 The wages of sin are death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through union with Christ Jesus, our Lord.
ROM 7:1 Surely, friends, you know (for I am speaking to people who know what Law means) that Law has power over a person only as long as they lives.
ROM 7:2 For example, by law a married woman is bound to her husband while he is living; but, if her husband dies, she is set free from the law that bound her to him.
ROM 7:3 If, then, during her husband’s lifetime, she unites herself to another man, she will be called an adulteress; but, if her husband dies, the law has no further hold on her, nor, if she unites herself to another man, is she an adulteress.
ROM 7:4 And so with you, my friends; as far as the Law was concerned, you underwent death in the crucified body of the Christ, so that you might be united to another, to him who was raised from the dead, in order that our lives might bear fruit for God.
ROM 7:5 When we were living merely earthly lives, our sinful passions, aroused by the Law, were active in every part of our bodies, with the result that our lives bore fruit for death.
ROM 7:6 But now we are set free from the Law, because we are dead to that which once kept us under restraint; and so we serve under new, spiritual conditions, and not under old, written regulations.
ROM 7:7 What are we to say, then? That Law and sin are the same thing? Heaven forbid! On the contrary, I should not have learned what sin is, had not it been for Law. If the Law did not say “You must not covet,” I should not know what it is to covet.
ROM 7:8 But sin took advantage of the commandment to arouse in me every form of covetousness, for where there is no consciousness of Law sin shows no sign of life.
ROM 7:9 There was a time when I myself, unconscious of Law, was alive; but when the commandment was brought home to me, sin sprang into life, while I died!
ROM 7:10 The commandment that should have meant life I found to result in death!
ROM 7:11 Sin took advantage of the commandment to deceive me, and used it to bring about my death.
ROM 7:12 And so the Law is holy, and each commandment is also holy, and just, and good.
ROM 7:13 Did, then, a thing, which in itself was good, involve death in my case? Heaven forbid! It was sin that involved death; so that, by its use of what I regarded as good to bring about my death, its true nature might appear; and in this way the commandment showed how intensely sinful sin is.
ROM 7:14 We know that the Law is spiritual, but I am earthly – sold into slavery to sin.
ROM 7:15 I do not understand my own actions. For I am so far from habitually doing what I want to do, that I find myself doing the thing that I hate.
ROM 7:16 But when I do what I want not to do, I am admitting that the Law is right.
ROM 7:17 This being so, the action is no longer my own, but is done by the sin which is within me.
ROM 7:18 I know that there is nothing good in me – I mean in my earthly nature. For, although it is easy for me to want to do right, to act rightly is not easy.
ROM 7:19 I fail to do the good thing that I want to do, but the bad thing that I want not to do – that I habitually do.
ROM 7:20 But, when I do the thing that I want not to do, the action is no longer my own, but is done by the sin which is within me.
ROM 7:21 This, then, is the law that I find – when I want to do right, wrong presents itself!
ROM 7:22 At heart I delight in the Law of God;
ROM 7:23 but throughout my body I see a different law, one which is in conflict with the law accepted by my reason, and which endeavours to make me a prisoner to that law of sin which exists throughout my body.
ROM 7:24 Miserable man that I am! Who will deliver me from the body that is bringing me to this death?
ROM 7:25 Thank God, there is deliverance through Jesus Christ, our Lord! Well then, for myself, with my reason I serve the Law of God, but with my earthly nature the Law of sin.
ROM 8:1 There is, therefore, now no condemnation for those who are in union with Christ Jesus;
ROM 8:2 for through your union with Christ Jesus, the Law of the life-giving Spirit has set you free from the Law of sin and death.
ROM 8:3 What Law could not do, in so far as our earthly nature weakened its action, God did, by sending his own Son, with a nature resembling our sinful nature, to atone for sin. He condemned sin in that earthly nature,
ROM 8:4 so that the requirements of the Law might be satisfied in us who live now in obedience, not to our earthly nature, but to the Spirit.
ROM 8:5 They who follow their earthly nature are earthly-minded, while they who follow the Spirit are spiritually minded.
ROM 8:6 To be earthly-minded means death, to be spiritually minded means life and peace;
ROM 8:7 because to be earthly-minded is to be an enemy to God, for such a mind does not submit to the Law of God, nor indeed can it do so.
ROM 8:8 They who are earthly cannot please God.
ROM 8:9 You, however, are not earthly but spiritual, since the Spirit of God lives within you. Unless a person has the Spirit of Christ, they do not belong to Christ;
ROM 8:10 but, if Christ is within you, then, though the body is dead as a consequence of sin, the spirit is life as a consequence of righteousness.
ROM 8:11 And, if the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead lives within you, he who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will give life even to your mortal bodies, through his Spirit living within you.
ROM 8:12 So then, friends, we owe nothing to our earthly nature, that we should live in obedience to it.
ROM 8:13 If you live in obedience to your earthly nature, you will inevitably die; but if, by the power of the Spirit, you put an end to the evil habits of the body, you will live.
ROM 8:14 All who are guided by the Spirit of God are children of God.
ROM 8:15 For you did not receive the spirit of a slave, to fill you once more with fear, but the spirit of a child by adoption, which leads us to cry “Abba, our Father.”
ROM 8:16 The Spirit himself unites with our spirits in bearing witness to our being God’s children,
ROM 8:17 and if children, then heirs – heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, since we share Christ’s sufferings in order that we may also share his glory.
ROM 8:18 I do not count the sufferings of our present life worthy of mention when compared with the glory that is to be revealed and bestowed on us.
ROM 8:19 All nature awaits with eager expectation the appearing of the sons of God.
ROM 8:20 For nature was made subject to imperfection – not by its own choice, but owing to him who made it so –
ROM 8:21 yet not without the hope that some day nature, also, will be set free from enslavement to decay, and will attain to the freedom which will mark the glory of the children of God.
ROM 8:22 We know, indeed, that all nature alike has been groaning in the pains of labour to this very hour.
ROM 8:23 And not nature only; but we ourselves also, though we have already a first gift of the Spirit – we ourselves are inwardly groaning, while we eagerly await our full adoption as sons – the redemption of our bodies.
ROM 8:24 By our hope we were saved. But the thing hoped for is no longer an object of hope when it is before our eyes; for who hopes for what is before his eyes?
ROM 8:25 But when we hope for what is not before our eyes, then we wait for it with patience.
ROM 8:26 So, also, the Spirit supports us in our weakness. We do not even know how to pray as we should; but the Spirit himself pleads for us in sighs that can find no utterance.
ROM 8:27 Yet he who searches all our hearts knows what the Spirit’s meaning is, because the pleadings of the Spirit for Christ’s people are in accordance with his will.
ROM 8:28 But we do know that God causes all things to work together for the good of those who love him – those who have received the call in accordance with his purpose.
ROM 8:29 For those whom God chose from the first he also destined from the first to be transformed into likeness to his Son, so that his Son might be the eldest among many brothers and sisters.
ROM 8:30 And those whom God destined for this he also called; and those whom he called he also pronounced righteous; and those whom he pronounced righteous he also brought to glory.
ROM 8:31 What are we to say, then, in the light of all this? If God is on our side, who can there be against us?
ROM 8:32 God did not withhold his own Son, but gave him up on behalf of us all; will he not, then, with him, freely give us all things?
ROM 8:33 Who will bring a charge against any of God’s people? He who pronounces them righteous is God!
ROM 8:34 Who is there to condemn them? He who died for us is Christ Jesus! – or, rather, it was he who was raised from the dead, and who is now at God’s right hand and is even pleading on our behalf!
ROM 8:35 Who is there to separate us from the love of the Christ? Will trouble, or difficulty, or persecution, or hunger, or nakedness, or danger, or the sword?
ROM 8:36 Scripture says – “For your sake we are being killed all the day long, We are regarded as sheep to be slaughtered.”
ROM 8:37 Yet amid all these things we more than conquer through him who loved us!
ROM 8:38 For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor archangels, nor the present, nor the future, nor any powers,
ROM 8:39 nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing, will be able to separate us from the love of God revealed in Christ Jesus, our Lord!
ROM 9:1 I am speaking the truth as one in union with Christ; it is no lie; and my conscience, enlightened by the Holy Spirit,
ROM 9:2 bears me out when I say that there is a great weight of sorrow on me and that my heart is never free from pain.
ROM 9:3 I could wish that I were myself accursed and severed from the Christ, for the sake of my people – my own flesh and blood.
ROM 9:4 For they are Israelites, and theirs are the adoption as children, the visible presence, the covenants, the revealed Law, the Temple worship, and the promises.
ROM 9:5 They are descended from the patriarchs, and, as far as his human nature was concerned, from them came the Christ – he who is supreme over all things, God for ever blessed. Amen.
ROM 9:6 Not that God’s Word has failed. For it is not all who are descended from Israel who are true Israelites;
ROM 9:7 nor, because they are Abraham’s descendants, are they all his children; but – “It is Isaac’s children who will be called your descendants.”
ROM 9:8 This means that it is not the children born in the course of nature who are God’s children, but it is the children born in fulfilment of the promise who are to be regarded as Abraham’s descendants.
ROM 9:9 For these words are the words of a promise – “About this time I will come, and Sarah will have a son.”
ROM 9:10 Nor is that all. There is also the case of Rebecca, when she was about to bear children to our ancestor Isaac.
ROM 9:11 For in order that the purpose of God, working through selection, might not fail – a selection depending, not on obedience, but on his call – Rebecca was told, before her children were born and before they had done anything either right or wrong,
ROM 9:12 that the elder would be a servant to the younger.
ROM 9:13 The words of scripture are – “I loved Jacob, but I hated Esau.”
ROM 9:14 What are we to say, then? Is God guilty of injustice? Heaven forbid!
ROM 9:15 For his words to Moses are – “I will take pity on whom I take pity, and be merciful to whom I am merciful.”
ROM 9:16 So, then, all depends, not on human wishes or human efforts, but on God’s mercy.
ROM 9:17 In scripture, again, it is said to Pharaoh – “It was for this purpose that I raised you to the throne, to show my power by my dealings with you, and to make my name known throughout the world.”
ROM 9:18 So, then, where God wills, he takes pity, and where he wills, he hardens the heart.
ROM 9:19 Perhaps you will say to me – “How can anyone still be blamed? For who withstands his purpose?”
ROM 9:20 I might rather ask “Who are you who are arguing with God?” Does a thing which a person has moulded say to the person who has moulded it “Why did you make me like this?”
ROM 9:21 Has not the potter absolute power over their clay, so that out of the same lump they make one thing for better, and another for common, use?
ROM 9:22 And what if God, intending to reveal his displeasure and make his power known, bore most patiently with the objects of his displeasure, though they were fit only to be destroyed,
ROM 9:23 so as to make known his surpassing glory in dealing with the objects of his mercy, whom he prepared beforehand for glory,
ROM 9:24 and whom he called – even us – not only from among the Jews but from among the Gentiles also!
ROM 9:25 This, indeed, is what he says in the book of Hosea – “Those who were not my people, I will call my people, and those who were unloved I will love.
ROM 9:26 And in the place where it was said to them – ‘You are not my people’, they will be called sons of the living God.”
ROM 9:27 And Isaiah cries aloud over Israel – “Though the sons of Israel are like the sand of the sea in number, only a remnant of them will escape!
ROM 9:28 For the Lord will execute his sentence on the world, fully and without delay.”
ROM 9:29 It is as Isaiah foretold – “Had not the Lord of Hosts spared some few of our people to us, we should have become like Sodom and been made to resemble Gomorrah.”
ROM 9:30 What are we to say, then? Why, that Gentiles, who were not in search of righteousness, secured it – a righteousness which was the result of faith;
ROM 9:31 while Israel, which was in search of a Law which would ensure righteousness, failed to discover one.
ROM 9:32 And why? Because they looked to obedience, and not to faith, to secure it. They stumbled over the stumbling-block.
ROM 9:33 As scripture says – “See, I place a stumbling-block in Zion – a rock which will prove a hindrance; and he who believes in him will have no cause for shame.”
ROM 10:1 My friends, my heart’s desire and prayer to God for my people is for their salvation.
ROM 10:2 I can testify that they are zealous for the honour of God; but they are not guided by true insight,
ROM 10:3 for, in their ignorance of the divine righteousness, and in their eagerness to set up a righteousness of their own, they refused to accept with submission the divine righteousness.
ROM 10:4 For Christ has brought Law to an end, so that righteousness may be obtained by everyone who believes in him.
ROM 10:5 For Moses writes that, as for the righteousness which results from Law, those who practice it will find life through it.
ROM 10:6 But the righteousness which results from faith finds expression in these words: “Do not say to yourself ‘Who will go up into heaven?’” (which means to bring Christ down)
ROM 10:7 “or ‘Who will go down into the depths below?’” (which means to bring Christ up from the dead).
ROM 10:8 No, but what does it say? “The message is near you, on your lips and in your heart” (which means “The message of faith” which we proclaim).
ROM 10:9 For, if with your lips you acknowledge the truth of the message that JESUS IS LORD, and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
ROM 10:10 For with their hearts people believe and so attain to righteousness, while with their lips they make their profession of faith and so find salvation.
ROM 10:11 As the passage of scripture says – “No one who believes in him will have any cause for shame.”
ROM 10:12 For no distinction is made between the Jew and the Greek, for all have the same Lord, and he is bountiful to all who invoke him.
ROM 10:13 For everyone who invokes the name of the Lord will be saved.
ROM 10:14 But how, it may be asked, are they to invoke one in whom they have not learned to believe? And how are they to believe in one whose words they have not heard? And how are they to hear his words unless someone proclaims him?
ROM 10:15 And how is anyone to proclaim him unless they are sent as his messengers? As scripture says – “How beautiful are the feet of those who bring good news!”
ROM 10:16 Still, it may be said, everyone did not give heed to the good news. No, for Isaiah asks – “Lord, who has believed our teaching?”
ROM 10:17 And so we gather, faith is a result of teaching, and the teaching comes in the message of Christ.
ROM 10:18 But I ask “Is it possible that people have never heard?” No, indeed, for – “Their voices spread through all the earth, and their message to the ends of the world.”
ROM 10:19 But again I ask “Did not the people of Israel understand?” First there is Moses, who says – “I, the Lord, will stir you to rivalry with a nation which is no nation; against an undiscerning nation I will arouse your anger.”
ROM 10:20 And Isaiah says boldly – “I was found by those who were not seeking me; I made myself known to those who were not inquiring of me.”
ROM 10:21 But of the people of Israel he says – “All day long I have stretched out my hands to a people who disobey and contradict.”
ROM 11:1 I ask, then, “Has God rejected his people?” Heaven forbid! For I myself am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
ROM 11:2 God has not rejected his people, whom he chose from the first. Have you forgotten the words of scripture in the story of Elijah – how he appeals to God against Israel?
ROM 11:3 “Lord, they have killed your prophets, they have pulled down your altars, and I only am left; and now they are eager to take my life.”
ROM 11:4 But what was the divine response? “I have kept for myself seven thousand who have never bowed the knee to Baal.”
ROM 11:5 And so in our own time, too, there is to be found a remnant of our nation selected by God in love.
ROM 11:6 But if in love, then it is not as a result of obedience. Otherwise love would cease to be love.
ROM 11:7 What follows from this? Why, that Israel as a nation failed to secure what it was seeking, while those whom God selected did secure it.
ROM 11:8 The rest grew callous; as scripture says – “God has given them a deadness of mind – eyes that are not to see and ears that are not to hear – and it is so to this very day.”
ROM 11:9 David, too, says – “May their feasts prove a snare and a trap to them – a hindrance and a retribution;
ROM 11:10 may their eyes be darkened, so that they cannot see; and do you always make their backs to bend.”
ROM 11:11 I ask then – “Was their stumbling to result in their fall?” Heaven forbid! On the contrary, through their falling away salvation has reached the Gentiles, to stir the rivalry of Israel.
ROM 11:12 And, if their falling away has enriched the world, and their failure has enriched the Gentiles, how much more will result from their full restoration!
ROM 11:13 But I am speaking to you who were Gentiles.
ROM 11:14 Being myself an apostle to the Gentiles, I exalt my office, in the hope that I may stir my countrymen to rivalry, and so save some of them.
ROM 11:15 For, if their being cast aside has meant the reconciliation of the world, what will their reception mean, but life from the dead?
ROM 11:16 If the first handful of dough is holy, so is the whole mass, and if the root is holy, so are the branches.
ROM 11:17 Some, however, of the branches were broken off, and you, who were only a wild olive, were grafted in among them, and came to share with them the root which is the source of the richness of the cultivated olive.
ROM 11:18 Yet do not exult over the other branches. But, if you do exult over them, remember that you do not support the root, but that the root supports you.
ROM 11:19 But branches, you will say, were broken off, so that I might be grafted in.
ROM 11:20 True, it was because of their want of faith that they were broken off, and it is because of your faith that you are standing. Do not think too highly of yourself, but beware.
ROM 11:21 For, if God did not spare the natural branches, neither will he spare you.
ROM 11:22 See, then, both the goodness and the severity of God – his severity towards those who fell, and his goodness towards you, provided that you continue to confide in that goodness; otherwise you, also, will be cut off.
ROM 11:23 And they, too, if they do not continue in their unbelief, will be grafted in; for God has it in his power to graft them in again.
ROM 11:24 If you were cut off from your natural stock – a wild olive – and were grafted, contrary to the course of nature, on a good olive, much more will they – the natural branches – be grafted back into their parent tree.
ROM 11:25 My friends, so that you don’t think too highly of yourselves, I want you to recognise the truth, hitherto hidden, that the callousness which has come over Israel is only partial, and will continue only until the whole Gentile world has been gathered in.
ROM 11:26 And then all Israel will be saved. As scripture says – “From Zion will come the Deliverer; he will banish ungodliness from Jacob.
ROM 11:27 And they will see the fulfilment of my covenant, when I have taken away their sins.”
ROM 11:28 From the standpoint of the good news, the Jews are God’s enemies for your sake; but from the standpoint of God’s selection, they are dear to him for the sake of the patriarchs.
ROM 11:29 For God never regrets his gifts or his call.
ROM 11:30 Just as you at one time were disobedient to him, but have now found mercy in the day of their disobedience;
ROM 11:31 so, too, they have now become disobedient in your day of mercy, in order that they also in their turn may now find mercy.
ROM 11:32 For God has given all alike over to disobedience, that to all alike he may show mercy.
ROM 11:33 Oh! The unfathomable wisdom and knowledge of God! How inscrutable are his judgments, how untraceable his ways! Yes –
ROM 11:34 ho has ever comprehended the mind of the Lord? Who has ever become his counsellor?
ROM 11:35 Or who has first given to him, so that he may claim a reward?
ROM 11:36 For all things are from him, through him, and for him. And to him be all glory for ever and ever! Amen.
ROM 12:1 I entreat you, then, friends, by the mercies of God, to offer your bodies as a living and holy sacrifice, acceptable to God, for this is your rational worship.
ROM 12:2 Do not conform to the fashion of this world; but be transformed by the complete change that has come over your minds, so that you may discern what God’s will is – all that is good, acceptable, and perfect.
ROM 12:3 In fulfilment of the charge with which I have been entrusted, I tell every one of you not to think more highly of themselves than they ought to think, but to think until they learn to think soberly – in accordance with the measure of faith that God has allotted to each.
ROM 12:4 For, just as in the human body there is a union of many parts, and each part has its own function,
ROM 12:5 so we, by our union in Christ, many though we are, form but one body, and individually we are related one to another as its parts.
ROM 12:6 Since our gifts differ in accordance with the particular charge entrusted to us, if our gift is to preach, let our preaching correspond to our faith;
ROM 12:7 if it is to minister to others, let us devote ourselves to our ministry; the teacher to their teaching,
ROM 12:8 the counselor to their counsel. Let the person who gives in charity do so with a generous heart; let the person who is in authority exercise due diligence; let the person who shows kindness do so in a cheerful spirit.
ROM 12:9 Let your love be sincere. Hate the wrong; cling to the right.
ROM 12:10 In the love of the community of the Lord’s followers, be affectionate to one another; in showing respect, set an example of deference to one another;
ROM 12:11 never flagging in zeal; fervent in spirit; serving the Master;
ROM 12:12 rejoicing in your hope; steadfast under persecution; persevering in prayer;
ROM 12:13 relieving the wants of Christ’s people; devoted to hospitality.
ROM 12:14 Bless your persecutors – bless and never curse.
ROM 12:15 Rejoice with those who are rejoicing, and weep with those who are weeping.
ROM 12:16 Let the same spirit of sympathy animate you all, not a spirit of pride; enjoy the company of ordinary people. Do not think too highly of yourselves.
ROM 12:17 Never return injury for injury. Aim at doing what everyone will recognise as honourable.
ROM 12:18 If it is possible, as far as rests with you, live peaceably with everyone.
ROM 12:19 Never avenge yourselves, dear friends, but make way for the wrath of God; for scripture declares – “‘It is for me to avenge, I will requite,’ says the Lord.”
ROM 12:20 Rather – “If your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him to drink. By doing this you will heap coals of fire on his head.”
ROM 12:21 Never be conquered by evil, but conquer evil with good.
ROM 13:1 Let everyone obey the supreme authorities. For no authority exists except by the will of God, and the existing authorities have been appointed by God.
ROM 13:2 Therefore the one who sets themself against the authorities is resisting God’s appointment, and those who resist will bring a judgment on themselves.
ROM 13:3 A good action has nothing to fear from rulers; a bad action has. Do you want to have no reason to fear the authorities? Then do what is good, and you will win their praise.
ROM 13:4 For they are God’s servants appointed for your good. But, if you do what is wrong, you may well be afraid; for the sword they carry is not without meaning! They are God’s servants to inflict his punishments on those who do wrong.
ROM 13:5 You are bound, therefore, to obey, not only through fear of God’s punishments, but also as a matter of conscience.
ROM 13:6 This, too, is the reason for your paying taxes; for the officials are God’s officers, devoting themselves to this special work.
ROM 13:7 In all cases pay what is due from you – tribute where tribute is due, taxes where taxes are due, respect where respect is due, and honour where honour is due.
ROM 13:8 Owe nothing to anyone except love; for they who love their neighbour have satisfied the Law.
ROM 13:9 The commandments, “You must not commit adultery, you must not kill, you must not steal, you must not covet,” and whatever other commandment there is, are all summed up in the words – “You must love your neighbour as you love yourself.”
ROM 13:10 Love never wrongs a neighbour. Therefore love fully satisfies the Law.
ROM 13:11 This I say, because you know the crisis that we have reached, for the time has already come for you to rouse yourselves from sleep; our salvation is nearer now than when we accepted the faith.
ROM 13:12 The night is almost gone; the day is near. Therefore let us be done with the deeds of darkness, and arm ourselves with the weapons of light.
ROM 13:13 Being in the light of day, let us live becomingly, not in revelry and drunkenness, not in lust and licentiousness, not in quarrelling and jealousy.
ROM 13:14 No! Arm yourselves with the spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, and spend no thought on your earthly nature, to satisfy its cravings.
ROM 14:1 As for those whose faith is weak, always receive them as friends, but not for the purpose of passing judgment on their scruples.
ROM 14:2 One person’s faith permits them to eat food of all kinds, while another whose faith is weak eats only vegetable food.
ROM 14:3 The person who eats meat must not despise the person who abstains from it; nor must the person who abstains from eating meat pass judgment on the one who eats it, for God himself has received them.
ROM 14:4 Who are you, that you should pass judgment on the servant of another? Their standing or falling concerns their own master. And stand they will, for their Master can enable them to stand.
ROM 14:5 Again, one person considers some days to be more sacred than others, while another considers all days to be alike. Everyone ought to be fully convinced in their own mind.
ROM 14:6 The person who observes a day, observes it to the Master’s honour. They, again, who eat meat eat it to the Master’s honour, for they give thanks to God; while the person who abstains from it abstains from it to the Master’s honour, and also gives thanks to God.
ROM 14:7 There is not one of us whose life concerns ourselves alone, and not one of us whose death concerns ourself alone;
ROM 14:8 for, if we live, our life is for the Master, and, if we die, our death is for the Master. Whether, then, we live or die we belong to the Master.
ROM 14:9 The purpose for which Christ died and came back to life was this – that he might be Lord over both the dead and the living.
ROM 14:10 I would ask the one “Why do you judge other followers of the Lord?” And I would ask the other “Why do you despise them?” For we will all stand before the court of God.
ROM 14:11 For scripture says – “‘As surely as I live,’ says the Lord, ‘every knee will bend before me and every tongue will praise God.’”
ROM 14:12 So, then, each one of us will have to render account of himself to God.
ROM 14:13 Let us, then, cease to judge one another. Rather let this be your resolve – never to place a stumbling-block or an obstacle in the way of a fellow follower of the Lord.
ROM 14:14 Through my union with the Lord Jesus, I know and am persuaded that nothing is defiling in itself. A thing is “defiling” only to the person who holds it to be so.
ROM 14:15 If, for the sake of what you eat, you wound your fellow follower’s feelings, your life has ceased to be ruled by love. Do not, by what you eat, ruin someone for whom Christ died!
ROM 14:16 Do not let what is right for you become a matter of reproach.
ROM 14:17 For the kingdom of God does not consist of eating and drinking, but of righteousness and peace and gladness through the presence of the Holy Spirit.
ROM 14:18 The person who serves the Christ in this way pleases God, and wins the approval of their fellows.
ROM 14:19 Therefore our efforts should be directed towards all that makes for peace and the mutual building up of character.
ROM 14:20 Do not undo God’s work for the sake of what you eat. Though everything is “clean,” yet, if a person eats so as to put a stumbling-block in the way of others, they do wrong.
ROM 14:21 The right course is to abstain from meat or wine or, indeed, anything that is a stumbling-block to your fellow follower of the Lord.
ROM 14:22 As for yourself – keep this conviction of yours to yourself, as in the presence of God. Happy the person who never has to condemn themselves in regard to something they think right!
ROM 14:23 The person, however, who has misgivings stands condemned if they still eat, because their doing so is not the result of faith. And anything not done as the result of faith is a sin.
ROM 15:1 We, the strong, ought to take on our own shoulders the weaknesses of those who are not strong, and not merely to please ourselves.
ROM 15:2 Let each of us please our neighbour for our neighbour’s good, to help in the building up of their character.
ROM 15:3 Even the Christ did not please himself! On the contrary, as scripture says of him – “The reproaches of those who were reproaching you fell upon me.”
ROM 15:4 Whatever was written in the scriptures in days gone by was written for our instruction, so that, through patient endurance, and through the encouragement drawn from the scriptures, we might hold fast to our hope.
ROM 15:5 And may God, the giver of this patience and this encouragement, grant you to be united in sympathy in Christ,
ROM 15:6 so that with one heart and one voice you may praise the God and Father of Jesus Christ, our Lord.
ROM 15:7 Therefore always receive one another as friends, just as the Christ himself received us, to the glory of God.
ROM 15:8 For I tell you that Christ, in vindication of God’s truthfulness, has become a minister of the covenant of circumcision, so that he may fulfil the promises made to our ancestors,
ROM 15:9 and that the Gentiles also may praise God for his mercy. As scripture says – “Therefore will I make acknowledgment to you among the Gentiles and sing in honour of your name.”
ROM 15:10 And again it says – “Rejoice, you Gentiles, with God’s people.”
ROM 15:11 And yet again – “Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles, and let all Peoples sing his praises.”
ROM 15:12 Again, Isaiah says – “There will be a Scion of the house of Jesse, One who is to arise to rule the Gentiles; on him will the Gentiles rest their hopes.”
ROM 15:13 May God, who inspires our hope, grant you perfect happiness and peace in your faith, until you are filled with this hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.
ROM 15:14 I am persuaded, my friends – yes, I Paul, with regard to you – that you are yourselves full of kindness, furnished with all Christian learning, and well able to give advice to one another.
ROM 15:15 But in parts of this letter I have expressed myself somewhat boldly – by way of refreshing your memories –
ROM 15:16 because of the charge with which God has entrusted me, that I should be an assistant of Christ Jesus to go to the Gentiles – that I should act as a priest of God’s good news, so that the offering up of the Gentiles may be an acceptable sacrifice, consecrated by the Holy Spirit.
ROM 15:17 It is, then, through my union with Christ Jesus that I have a proud confidence in my work for God.
ROM 15:18 For I will not dare to speak of anything but what Christ has done through me to win the obedience of the Gentiles –
ROM 15:19 by my words and actions, through the power displayed in signs and marvels, and through the power of the Holy Spirit. And so, starting from Jerusalem and going as far as Illyria, I have told in full the good news of the Christ;
ROM 15:20 yet always with the ambition to tell the good news where Christ’s name had not previously been heard, so as to avoid building on another’s foundations.
ROM 15:21 But as scripture says – “They to whom he had never been proclaimed will see; and they who have never heard will understand!”
ROM 15:22 That is why I have so often been prevented from coming to you.
ROM 15:23 But now there are no further openings for me in these parts, and I have for several years been longing to come to you whenever I may be going to Spain.
ROM 15:24 For my hope is to visit you on my journey, and then to be sent on my way by you, after I have first partly satisfied myself by seeing something of you.
ROM 15:25 Just now, however, I am on my way to Jerusalem, to take help to Christ’s people there.
ROM 15:26 For Macedonia and Greece have been glad to make a collection for the poor among Christ’s people at Jerusalem.
ROM 15:27 Yes, they were glad to do so; and indeed it is a duty which they owe to them. For the Gentile converts who have shared their spiritual blessings are in duty bound to minister to them in the things of this world.
ROM 15:28 When I have settled this matter, and have secured for the poor at Jerusalem the enjoyment of these benefits, I will go, by way of you, to Spain.
ROM 15:29 And I know that, when I come to you, it will be with a full measure of blessing from Christ.
ROM 15:30 I beg you, then, friends, by Jesus Christ, our Lord, and by the love inspired by the Spirit, to join me in earnest prayer to God on my behalf.
ROM 15:31 Pray that I may be rescued from those in Judea who reject the faith, and that the help which I am taking to Jerusalem may prove acceptable to Christ’s people;
ROM 15:32 so that, God willing, I may be able to come to you with a joyful heart, and enjoy some rest among you.
ROM 15:33 May God, the giver of peace, be with you all. Amen.
ROM 16:1 I commend to your care our sister, Phoebe, who is a minister of the church at Cenchreae;
ROM 16:2 and I ask you to give her a Christian welcome – one worthy of Christ’s people – and to aid her in any matter in which she may need your assistance. She has proved herself a staunch friend and protector and to many others.
ROM 16:3 Give my greeting to Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in the cause of Christ Jesus,
ROM 16:4 who risked their own lives to save mine. It is not I alone who thank them, but all the churches among the Gentiles thank them also.
ROM 16:5 Give my greeting, also, to the church that meets at their house, as well as to my dear friend Epaenetus, one of the first in Roman Asia to believe in Christ;
ROM 16:6 to Mary, who worked hard for you;
ROM 16:7 to Andronicus and Junia, fellow Jews and once my fellow prisoners, who are people of note among the apostles, and who became Christians before I did;
ROM 16:8 to my dear Christian friend Ampliatus;
ROM 16:9 to Urban, our fellow worker in the cause of Christ, and to my dear friend Stachys;
ROM 16:10 to that tried and true Christian Apelles; to the household of Aristobulus;
ROM 16:11 to my countryman Herodion; to the Christians in the household of Narcissus;
ROM 16:12 to Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who have worked hard for the Master; to my dear friend Persis, for she has done much hard work for the Master;
ROM 16:13 to that eminent Christian, Rufus, and to his mother, who has been a mother to me also;
ROM 16:14 to Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and our friends with them;
ROM 16:15 also to Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and to all Christ’s people who are with them.
ROM 16:16 Greet one another with a sacred kiss. All the churches of the Christ send you greetings.
ROM 16:17 I beg you, friends, to be on your guard against people who, by disregarding the teaching which you received, cause divisions and create difficulties; dissociate yourselves from them.
ROM 16:18 For such persons are not serving Christ, our Master, but are slaves to their own appetites; and, by their smooth words and flattery, they deceive simple-minded people.
ROM 16:19 Everyone has heard of your ready obedience. It is true that I am very happy about you, but I want you to be well versed in all that is good, and innocent of all that is bad.
ROM 16:20 And God, the giver of peace, will before long crush Satan under your feet. May the blessing of Jesus, our Lord, be with you.
ROM 16:21 Timothy, my fellow worker, sends you his greetings, and Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, my countrymen, send theirs.
ROM 16:22 I Tertius, who am writing this letter, send you my Christian greeting.
ROM 16:23 My host Gaius, who extends his hospitality to the whole church, sends you his greeting; and Erastus, the city treasurer, and Quartus, our dear friend, add theirs.
ROM 16:24 
ROM 16:25 Now to him who is able to strengthen you, as promised in the good news entrusted to me and in the proclamation of Jesus Christ, in accordance with the revelation of that hidden purpose, which in past ages was kept secret but now has been revealed
ROM 16:26 and, in obedience to the command of the immortal God, made known through the writings of the prophets to all nations, to secure submission to the faith –
ROM 16:27 to him, I say, the wise and only God, be ascribed, through Jesus Christ, all glory for ever and ever. Amen.
1CO 1:1 To the church of God in Corinth, to those who have been consecrated by union with Christ Jesus and called to become his people, and also to all, wherever they may be, who invoke the name of our Lord Jesus Christ – their Master and ours,
1CO 1:2 from Paul, who has been called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and from Sosthenes, our fellow follower of the Lord.
1CO 1:3 May God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace.
1CO 1:4 I always thank God for you. I thank him for the blessing bestowed on you in Christ Jesus.
1CO 1:5 For through union with him you were enriched in every way – in your power to preach, and in your knowledge of the truth;
1CO 1:6 and so became yourselves a confirmation of my testimony to the Christ.
1CO 1:7 There is no gift in which you are deficient, while waiting for our Lord Jesus Christ to be revealed.
1CO 1:8 And God himself will strengthen you to the end, so that at the day of our Lord Jesus Christ you may be found blameless.
1CO 1:9 God will not fail you, and it is he who called you into communion with his Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord.
1CO 1:10 But I appeal to you, my friends, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to agree in what you profess, and not to allow divisions to exist among you, but to be united – of one mind and of one opinion.
1CO 1:11 For I have been informed, my friends, by the members of Chloe’s household, that party feeling exists among you.
1CO 1:12 I mean this: that every one of you says either “I follow Paul,” or “I Apollos,” or “I Cephas,” or “I Christ.”
1CO 1:13 You have torn the Christ in pieces! Was it Paul who was crucified for you? Or were you baptised in the name of Paul?
1CO 1:14 I am thankful that I did not baptise any of you except Crispus and Gaius,
1CO 1:15 so that no one can say that you were baptised in my name.
1CO 1:16 I baptised also the household of Stephanas. I do not know that I baptised anyone else.
1CO 1:17 My mission from Christ was not to baptise, but to tell the good news; not, however, in the language of philosophy, in case the cross of the Christ should be robbed of its meaning.
1CO 1:18 The message of the cross is indeed mere folly to those who are on the path to ruin, but to us who are on the path of salvation it is the power of God.
1CO 1:19 For scripture says – “I will bring the philosophy of the philosophers to naught, and the shrewdness of the shrewd I will bring to nothing.”
1CO 1:20 Where is the philosopher? Where the teacher of the Law? Where the disputant of today? Has not God shown the world’s philosophy to be folly?
1CO 1:21 For since the world, in God’s wisdom, did not by its philosophy learn to know God, God saw fit, by the “folly” of our proclamation, to save those who believe in Christ!
1CO 1:22 While Jews ask for miraculous signs, and Greeks study philosophy,
1CO 1:23 we are proclaiming Christ crucified! – to the Jews an obstacle, to the Gentiles mere folly,
1CO 1:24 but to those who have received the call, whether Jews or Greeks, Christ, the power of God and the wisdom of God!
1CO 1:25 For God’s “folly” is wiser than people, and God’s “weakness” is stronger than people.
1CO 1:26 Look at the facts of your call, friends. There are not many among you who are wise, as people reckon wisdom, not many who are influential, not many who are high-born;
1CO 1:27 but God chose what the world counts foolish to put its wise to shame, and God chose what the world counts weak to put its strong to shame,
1CO 1:28 and God chose what the world counts poor and insignificant – things that to it are unreal – to bring its “realities” to nothing,
1CO 1:29 so that in his presence no one should boast.
1CO 1:30 But you, by your union with Christ Jesus, belong to God; and Christ, by God’s will, became not only our wisdom, but also our righteousness, holiness, and deliverance,
1CO 1:31 so that – in the words of scripture – “Whoever boasts should boast of the Lord!”
1CO 2:1 For my own part, friends, when I came to you, it was with no display of eloquence or philosophy that I came to tell the hidden purpose of God;
1CO 2:2 for I had determined that, while with you, I would forget everything except Jesus Christ – and him crucified!
1CO 2:3 Indeed, when I came among you, I was weak, and full of fears, and in great anxiety.
1CO 2:4 My message and my proclamation were not delivered in the persuasive language of philosophy, but were accompanied by the manifestation of spiritual power,
1CO 2:5 so that your faith should be based, not on the human wisdom, but on the power of God.
1CO 2:6 Yet there is a philosophy that we teach to those whose faith is matured, but it is not the philosophy of today, or of the leaders of today – whose downfall is at hand.
1CO 2:7 No, it is a divine philosophy that we teach, one concerned with the hidden purpose of God – that long hidden philosophy which God, before time began, destined for our glory.
1CO 2:8 This philosophy is clearly not known to any of the leaders of today, since, had they known it, they would never have crucified our glorious Lord!
1CO 2:9 It is what scripture speaks of as – “What eye never saw, nor ear ever heard, what never entered people’s minds – all these things God has prepared for those who love him.”
1CO 2:10 Yet to us God revealed it through his Spirit; for the Spirit fathoms all things, even the inmost depths of God’s being.
1CO 2:11 For what person is there who knows what a person is, except the person’s own spirit within them? So, also, no one comprehends what God is, except the Spirit of God.
1CO 2:12 And as for us, it is not the spirit of the world that we have received, but the Spirit that comes from God, so that we may realize the blessings given to us by him.
1CO 2:13 And we speak of these gifts, not in language taught by human philosophy, but in language taught by the Spirit, explaining spiritual things in spiritual words.
1CO 2:14 The merely intellectual person rejects the teaching of the Spirit of God; for to them it is mere folly; they cannot grasp it, because it is to be understood only by spiritual insight.
1CO 2:15 But the person with spiritual insight is able to understand everything, although they themselves are understood by no one.
1CO 2:16 For who has so comprehended the mind of the Lord as to be able to instruct him? We, however, have the mind of Christ.
1CO 3:1 But I, my friends, could not speak to you as people with spiritual insight, but only as worldly-minded – mere infants in the faith of Christ.
1CO 3:2 I fed you with milk, not with solid food, for you were not then able to take it. No, and even now you are not able; you are still worldly.
1CO 3:3 While there exist among you jealousy and party feeling, is it not true that you are worldly, and are acting merely as other people do?
1CO 3:4 When one says “I follow Paul,” and another “I follow Apollos,” aren’t you like other people?
1CO 3:5 What, I ask, is Apollos? Or what is Paul? Servants through whom you were led to accept the faith; and that only as the Lord helped each of you.
1CO 3:6 I planted, and Apollos watered, but it was God who caused the growth.
1CO 3:7 Therefore neither the one who plants, nor the one who waters, counts for anything, but only God who causes the growth.
1CO 3:8 In this the person who plants and the person who waters are one; yet each will receive their own reward in proportion to their own labour.
1CO 3:9 For we are God’s fellow workers; you are God’s harvest field, God’s building.
1CO 3:10 In fulfilment of the charge which God had entrusted to me, I laid the foundation like a skilful master; but someone else is now building on it. Let everyone take care how they build;
1CO 3:11 for no one can lay any other foundation than the one already laid – Jesus Christ.
1CO 3:12 Whatever is used by those who build on this foundation, whether gold, silver, costly stones, wood, hay, or straw,
1CO 3:13 the quality of each man’s work will become known, for the day will make it plain; because that day is to be ushered in with fire, and the fire itself will test the quality of every man’s work.
1CO 3:14 If anyone’s work, which they have built on that foundation, still remains, they will gain a reward.
1CO 3:15 If anyone’s work is burnt up, they will suffer loss; though they themselves will escape, but only as one who has passed through fire.
1CO 3:16 Don’t you know that you are God’s Temple, and that God’s Spirit has his home in you?
1CO 3:17 If any one destroys the Temple of God, God will destroy them; for the Temple of God is sacred, and so also are you.
1CO 3:18 Let no one deceive himself. If any one among you imagines that, as regards this world, they are wise, they should become a “fool,” that they may become wise.
1CO 3:19 For in God’s sight this world’s wisdom is folly. Scripture tells of – “One who catches the wise in their own craftiness,”
1CO 3:20 And it says again – “The Lord sees how fruitless are the deliberations of the wise.”
1CO 3:21 Therefore let no one boast about people; for all things are yours –
1CO 3:22 whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or the present, or the future – all things are yours!
1CO 3:23 But you are Christ’s and Christ is God’s.
1CO 4:1 Let people look on us as Christ’s servants, and as stewards of the hidden truths of God.
1CO 4:2 Now what we look for in stewards is that they should be trustworthy.
1CO 4:3 But it weighs very little with me that I am judged by you or by any human tribunal. No, I do not even judge myself;
1CO 4:4 for, though I am conscious of nothing against myself, that does not prove me innocent. It is the Lord who is my judge.
1CO 4:5 Therefore do not pass judgment before the time, but wait until the Lord comes. He will throw light on what is now dark and obscure, and will reveal the motives in people’s minds; and then everyone will receive due praise from God.
1CO 4:6 All this, friends, I have, for your sakes, applied to Apollos and myself, so that, from our example, you may learn to observe the precept – “Keep to what is written,” that none of you may speak boastfully of one teacher to the disparagement of another.
1CO 4:7 For who makes any one of you superior to others? And what have you that was not given you? But if you received it as a gift, why do you boast as if you had not?
1CO 4:8 Are you all so soon satisfied? Are you so soon rich? Have you begun to reign without us? Would indeed that you had, so that we also might reign with you!
1CO 4:9 For, as it seems to me, God has exhibited us, the apostles, last of all, as people doomed to death. We are made a spectacle to the universe, both to angels and to people!
1CO 4:10 We, for Christ’s sake, are fools, but you, by your union with Christ, are people of discernment. We are weak, but you are strong. You are honoured, but we are despised.
1CO 4:11 To this very hour we go hungry, thirsty, and naked; we are beaten; we are homeless;
1CO 4:12 we work hard, toiling with our own hands. We meet abuse with blessings, we meet persecution with endurance,
1CO 4:13 we meet slander with gentle appeals. We have been treated as the scum of the earth, the vilest of the vile, to this very hour.
1CO 4:14 It is with no wish to shame you that I am writing like this; but to warn you as my own dear children.
1CO 4:15 Though you may have thousands of instructors in the faith of Christ, yet you have not many fathers. It was I who, through union with Christ Jesus, became your father by means of the good news.
1CO 4:16 Therefore I entreat you – Follow my example.
1CO 4:17 This is my reason for sending Timothy to you. He is my own dear faithful child in the Master’s service, and he will remind you of my methods of teaching the faith of Christ Jesus – methods which I follow everywhere in every church.
1CO 4:18 Some, I hear, are puffed up with pride, thinking that I am not coming to you.
1CO 4:19 But come to you I will, and that soon, if it please the Lord; and then I will find out, not what words these people use who are so puffed up, but what power they possess;
1CO 4:20 for the kingdom of God is based, not on words, but on power.
1CO 4:21 What do you wish? Am I to come to you with a rod, or in a loving and gentle spirit?
1CO 5:1 There is a wide-spread report respecting a case of immorality among you, and that, too, of a kind that does not occur even among the Gentiles – a man, I hear, is living with his father’s wife!
1CO 5:2 Instead of grieving over it and taking steps for the expulsion of the man who has done this thing, is it possible that you are still puffed up?
1CO 5:3 For I myself, though absent in body, have been present with you in spirit, and in the name of our Lord Jesus I have already passed judgment, just as if I had been present, on the man who has acted in this way.
1CO 5:4 I have decided – having been present in spirit at your meetings, when the power of the Lord Jesus was with us –
1CO 5:5 to deliver such a man as this over to Satan, that what is sensual in him may be destroyed, so that his spirit may be saved at the day of the Lord.
1CO 5:6 Your boasting is unseemly. Don’t you know that even a little yeast leavens all the dough?
1CO 5:7 Get rid entirely of the old leaven, so that you may be like new dough – free from leaven, as in truth you are. For our passover lamb is already sacrificed – Christ himself;
1CO 5:8 therefore let us keep our festival, not with the leaven of former days, nor with the leaven of vice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
1CO 5:9 I told you, in my letter, not to associate with immoral people –
1CO 5:10 not, of course, meaning people of the world who are in immoral, or who are covetous and grasping, or who worship idols; for then you would have to leave the world altogether.
1CO 5:11 But, as things are, I say that you are not to associate with anyone who, although a follower of Christ in name, is immoral, or covetous, or an idolater, or abusive, or a drunkard, or grasping – no, not even to sit down to eat with such people.
1CO 5:12 What have I to do with judging those outside the church? Is it not for you to judge those who are within the church,
1CO 5:13 while God judges those who are outside? Put away the wicked from among you.
1CO 6:1 Can it be that, when one of you has a dispute with another, they dare to have their case tried before the heathen, instead of before Christ’s people?
1CO 6:2 Don’t you know that Christ’s people will try the world? And if the world is to be tried by you, are you unfit to try the most trivial cases?
1CO 6:3 Don’t you know that we are to try angels – to say nothing of the affairs of this life?
1CO 6:4 Why, then, if you have cases relating to the affairs of this life, do you set to try them those who carry no weight with the church? To your shame I ask it.
1CO 6:5 Can it be that there is not one among you wise enough to decide between two of their fellow followers?
1CO 6:6 Must a follower sue a fellow follower? In front of unbelievers?
1CO 6:7 To begin with, it is undoubtedly a loss to you to have lawsuits with one another. Why not rather let yourselves be wronged? Why not rather let yourselves be cheated?
1CO 6:8 Instead of this, you wrong and cheat others yourselves – yes, even other followers!
1CO 6:9 Don’t you know that wrongdoers will have no share in God’s kingdom? Do not be deceived. No one who is immoral, or an idolater, or an adulterer, or licentious, or a sexual pervert,
1CO 6:10 or a thief, or covetous, or a drunkard, or abusive, or grasping, will have any share in God’s kingdom.
1CO 6:11 Such some of you used to be; but you washed yourselves clean. You became Christ’s people! You were pronounced righteous through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and through the Spirit of our God!
1CO 6:12 Everything is allowable for me! Yes, but everything is not profitable. Everything is allowable for me! Yes, but for my part, I will not let myself be enslaved by anything.
1CO 6:13 Food exists for the stomach, and the stomach for food; but God will put an end to both the one and the other. The body, however, exists, not for immorality, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body;
1CO 6:14 and, as God has raised the Lord, so he will raise us up also by the exercise of his power.
1CO 6:15 Don’t you know that your bodies are Christ’s members? Am I, then, to take the members that belong to the Christ and make them the members of a prostitute? Heaven forbid!
1CO 6:16 Or don’t you know that a man who unites himself with a prostitute is one with her in body (for “the two,” it is said, “will become one”);
1CO 6:17 while a man who is united with the Lord is one with him in spirit?
1CO 6:18 Shun all immorality. Every other sin that people commit is something outside the body; but an immoral person sins against their own body.
1CO 6:19 Again, don’t you know that your body is a shrine of the Holy Spirit that is within you – the Spirit which you have from God?
1CO 6:20 Moreover, you are not your own masters; you were bought, and the price was paid. Therefore, honour God in your bodies.
1CO 7:1 With reference to the subjects about which you wrote to me: It is good for a man to remain single.
1CO 7:2 But, owing to the prevalence of immorality, I advise every man to have his own wife, and every woman her husband.
1CO 7:3 A husband should give his wife her due, and a wife her husband.
1CO 7:4 It is not the wife, but the husband, who exercises power over her body; and so, too, it is not the husband, but the wife, who exercises power over his body.
1CO 7:5 Do not deprive each other of what is due – unless it is only for a time and by mutual consent, so that your minds may be free for prayer until you again live as man and wife – otherwise Satan might take advantage of your want of self-control and tempt you.
1CO 7:6 I say this, however, as a concession, not as a command.
1CO 7:7 I should wish everyone to be just what I am myself. But everyone has his own gift from God – one in one way, and one in another.
1CO 7:8 My advice, then, to those who are not married, and to widows, is this: It would be good for them to remain as I am myself.
1CO 7:9 But, if they cannot control themselves, they should marry, for it is better to marry than to be consumed with passion.
1CO 7:10 To those who are married my direction is – yet it is not mine, but the Master’s – that a woman is not to leave her husband
1CO 7:11 (If she has done so, she should remain as she is, or else be reconciled to her husband) and also that a man is not to divorce his wife.
1CO 7:12 To all others I say – I, not the Master – If a follower of the Lord is married to a woman, who is an unbeliever but willing to live with him, he should not divorce her;
1CO 7:13 and a woman who is married to a man, who is an unbeliever but willing to live with her, should not divorce her husband.
1CO 7:14 For, through his wife, the husband who is an unbeliever has become associated with Christ’s people; and the wife who is an unbeliever has become associated with Christ’s people through the Lord’s follower whom she has married. Otherwise your children would be “defiled,” but, as it is, they belong to Christ’s people.
1CO 7:15 However, if the unbeliever wishes to be separated, let them be so. Under such circumstances neither is bound; God has called you to live in peace.
1CO 7:16 How can you tell, wife, whether you may not save your husband? And how can you tell, husband, whether you may not save your wife?
1CO 7:17 In any case, a person should continue to live in the condition which the Lord has allotted to them, and in which they were when God called them. This is the rule that I lay down in every church.
1CO 7:18 Was a man already circumcised when he was called? Then he should not efface his circumcision. Has a man been called when uncircumcised? Then he should not be circumcised.
1CO 7:19 Circumcision is nothing; the want of it is nothing; but to keep the commands of God is everything.
1CO 7:20 Let everyone remain in that condition of life in which they were when the call came to them.
1CO 7:21 Were you a slave when you were called? Do not let that trouble you. No, even if you are able to gain your freedom, still do your best.
1CO 7:22 For the person who was a slave when they were called to the master’s service is the Master’s freedman; so, too, the person who was free when called is Christ’s slave.
1CO 7:23 You were bought, and the price was paid. Do not let yourselves become slaves to people.
1CO 7:24 Friends, let everyone remain in the condition in which they were when they were called, in close communion with God.
1CO 7:25 With regard to unmarried women, I have no command from the Master to give you, but I tell you my opinion, and the Master in his mercy has made me worthy to be trusted.
1CO 7:26 I think, then, that, in view of the time of suffering that has now come upon us, what I have already said is best – that a man should remain as he is.
1CO 7:27 Are you married to a wife? Then do not seek to be separated. Are you separated from a wife? Then do not seek for a wife.
1CO 7:28 Still, if you should marry, that is not wrong; nor, if a young woman marries, is that wrong. But those who marry will have much trouble to bear, and my wish is to spare you.
1CO 7:29 What I mean, friends, is this – the time is short. Meanwhile, let those who have wives live as if they had none,
1CO 7:30 those who are weeping as if not weeping, those who are rejoicing as if not rejoicing, those who buy as if not possessing,
1CO 7:31 and those who use the good things of the world as using them sparingly; for this world as we see it is passing away.
1CO 7:32 I want you to be free from anxiety. The unmarried man is anxious about the Master’s cause, desiring to please him;
1CO 7:33 while the married man is anxious about worldly matters, desiring to please his wife;
1CO 7:34 and so his interests are divided. Again, the unmarried woman, whether she is old or young, is anxious about the Master’s cause, striving to be pure both in body and in spirit, while the married woman is anxious about worldly matters, desiring to please her husband.
1CO 7:35 I say this for your own benefit, not with any intention of putting a halter round your necks, but in order to secure for the Master seemly and constant devotion, free from all distraction.
1CO 7:36 If, however, a father thinks that he is not acting fairly by his unmarried daughter, when she is past her youth, and if under these circumstances her marriage ought to take place, he should act as he thinks right. He is doing nothing wrong – let the marriage take place.
1CO 7:37 On the other hand, a father, who has definitely made up his mind, and is under no compulsion, but is free to carry out his own wishes, and who has come to the decision, in his own mind, to keep his unmarried daughter at home will be doing right.
1CO 7:38 In short, the one who consents to his daughter’s marriage is doing right, and yet the other will be doing better.
1CO 7:39 A wife is bound to her husband as long as he lives; but, if the husband should pass to his rest, the widow is free to marry anyone she wishes, provided he is a believer.
1CO 7:40 Yet she will be happier if she remains as she is – in my opinion, for I think that I also have the Spirit of God.
1CO 8:1 With reference to food that has been offered in sacrifice to idols – We are aware that all of us have knowledge! Knowledge breeds conceit, while love builds up character.
1CO 8:2 If someone thinks that they know anything, they have not yet reached that knowledge which they ought to have reached.
1CO 8:3 On the other hand, if a person loves God, they are known by God.
1CO 8:4 With reference, then, to eating food that has been offered to idols – we are aware that an idol is nothing in the world, and that there is no God but one.
1CO 8:5 Even supposing that there are so-called “gods” either in heaven or on earth – and there are many such “gods” and “lords” –
1CO 8:6 Yet for us there is only one God, the Father, from whom all things come (and for him we live), and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things come (and through him we live).
1CO 8:7 Still, it is not everyone that has this knowledge. Some people, because of their association with idols, continued down to the present time, eat the food as food offered to an idol; and their consciences, while still weak, are dulled.
1CO 8:8 What we eat, however, will not bring us nearer to God. We lose nothing by not eating this food, and we gain nothing by eating it.
1CO 8:9 But take care that this right of yours does not become in any way a stumbling-block to the weak.
1CO 8:10 For if someone should see you who possess this knowledge, feasting in an idol’s temple, will not their conscience, if they are weak, become so hardened that they, too, will eat food offered to idols?
1CO 8:11 And so, through this knowledge of yours, the weak person is ruined – someone for whose sake Christ died!
1CO 8:12 In this way, by sinning against your fellow followers of the Lord and injuring their consciences, while still weak, you sin against Christ.
1CO 8:13 Therefore, if what I eat makes a follower of the Lord fall, rather than make them fall, I will never eat meat again.
1CO 9:1 Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen our Lord Jesus? Aren’t you yourselves my work achieved in union with the Lord?
1CO 9:2 If I am not an apostle to others, yet at least I am to you; for you are the seal that stamps me as an apostle in union with the Lord.
1CO 9:3 The defence that I make to my critics is this:
1CO 9:4 Haven’t we a right to food and drink?
1CO 9:5 Haven’t we a right to take a wife with us, if she is a Christian, as the other apostles and the Master’s brothers and Cephas all do?
1CO 9:6 Or is it only Barnabas and I who have no right to give up working for our bread?
1CO 9:7 Does anyone ever serve as a soldier at his own expense? Does anyone plant a vineyard and not eat its produce? Or does anyone look after a herd and not drink the milk?
1CO 9:8 Am I, in all this, speaking only from the human standpoint? Does not the Law also say the same?
1CO 9:9 For in the Law of Moses it is said – “You should not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain.” Is it the bullocks that God is thinking of?
1CO 9:10 Or is not is said entirely for our sakes? Surely it was written for our sakes, for the ploughman ought not to plough, nor the thrasher to thrash, without expecting a share of the grain.
1CO 9:11 Since we, then, sowed spiritual seed for you, is it too much that we should reap from you an earthly harvest?
1CO 9:12 If others share in this right over you, don’t we even more? Still we did not avail ourselves of this right. No, we endure anything rather than impede the progress of the good news of the Christ.
1CO 9:13 Don’t you know that those who do the work of the Temple live on what comes from the Temple, and that those who serve at the altar share the offerings with the altar?
1CO 9:14 So, too, the Master has appointed that those who tell the good news should get their living from the good news.
1CO 9:15 I, however, have not availed myself of any of these rights. I am not saying this to secure such an arrangement for myself; indeed, I would far rather die – Nobody will make my boast a vain one!
1CO 9:16 If I proclaim the good news, I have nothing to boast of, for I am compelled to do so. Woe is me if I do not share it!
1CO 9:17 If I do this work willingly, I have a reward; but, if unwillingly, I have been charged to perform a duty.
1CO 9:18 What is my reward, then? To present the good news free of all cost, and so make but a sparing use of the rights which it gives me.
1CO 9:19 Although I was entirely free, yet, to win as many converts as possible, I made myself everyone’s slave.
1CO 9:20 To the Jews I became like a Jew, to win Jews. To those who are subject to Law I became like a man subject to Law – though I was not myself subject to Law – to win those who are subject to Law.
1CO 9:21 To those who have no Law I became like a man who has no Law – not that I am free from God’s Law; no, for I am under Christ’s Law – to win those who have no law.
1CO 9:22 To the weak I became weak, to win the weak. I have become all things to all people, so as at all costs to save some.
1CO 9:23 And I do everything for the sake of the good news, so that with them I may share in its blessings.
1CO 9:24 Don’t you know that on a racecourse, though all run, yet only one wins the prize? Run in such a way that you may win.
1CO 9:25 Every athlete exercises self-restraint in everything; they, indeed, for a crown that fades, we for one that is unfading.
1CO 9:26 I, therefore, do not run aimlessly. I do not box like a man hitting the air.
1CO 9:27 No, I bruise my body and make it my slave, so that I, who have called others to the contest, will not myself be rejected.
1CO 10:1 I want you to bear in mind, friends, that all our ancestors were beneath the cloud, and all passed through the sea;
1CO 10:2 that in the cloud and in the sea they all underwent baptism as followers of Moses;
1CO 10:3 and that they all ate the same supernatural food,
1CO 10:4 and all drank the same supernatural water, for they used to drink from a supernatural rock which followed them, and that rock was the Christ.
1CO 10:5 Yet with most of them God was displeased; for they were struck down in the desert.
1CO 10:6 Now these things happened as warnings to us, to teach us not to long for evil things as our ancestors longed.
1CO 10:7 Do not become idolaters, as some of them became. Scripture says – “The people sat down to eat and drink, and stood up to dance.”
1CO 10:8 Nor let us act immorally, as some of them acted, with the result that twenty-three thousand of them fell dead in a single day.
1CO 10:9 Nor let us try the patience of the Lord too far, as some of them tried it, with the result that they were, one after another, destroyed by snakes.
1CO 10:10 And do not murmur, as some of them murmured, and so were destroyed by the angel of death.
1CO 10:11 These things happened to them by way of warning, and were recorded to serve as a caution to us, in whose days the close of the ages has come.
1CO 10:12 Therefore let the person who thinks that they stand take care that they do not fall.
1CO 10:13 No temptation has come upon you that is not common to all humanity. God will not fail you, and he will not allow you to be tempted beyond your strength; but, when he sends the temptation, he will also provide the way of escape, so that you may have strength to endure.
1CO 10:14 Therefore, my dear friends, shun the worship of idols.
1CO 10:15 I speak to you as man of discernment; form your own judgment about what I am saying.
1CO 10:16 In the cup of blessing which we bless, is not there a sharing in the blood of the Christ? And in the bread which we break, is not there a sharing in the body of the Christ?
1CO 10:17 The bread is one, and we, though many, are one body; for we all partake of that one bread.
1CO 10:18 Look at the people of Israel. Do not those who eat the sacrifices share with the altar?
1CO 10:19 What do I mean? That an offering made to an idol, or the idol itself, is anything?
1CO 10:20 No; what I say is that the sacrifices offered by the Gentiles are offered to demons and to a being who is no God, and I do not want you to share with demons.
1CO 10:21 You cannot drink both the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons. You cannot partake at the table of the Lord and at the table of demons.
1CO 10:22 Or are we to rouse the jealousy of the Lord? Are we stronger than he?
1CO 10:23 Everything is allowable! Yes, but everything is not profitable. Everything is allowable! Yes, but everything does not build up character.
1CO 10:24 A person must not study their own interests, but the interests of others.
1CO 10:25 Eat anything that is sold in the market, without making inquiries to satisfy your scruples;
1CO 10:26 for the earth, with all that is in it, belongs to the Lord.
1CO 10:27 If an unbeliever invites you to his house and you consent to go, eat anything that is put before you, without making inquiries to satisfy your scruples.
1CO 10:28 But, if anyone should say to you “This has been offered in sacrifice to an idol,” then, for the sake of the speaker and his scruples, do not eat it.
1CO 10:29 I do not say your scruples, but his. For why should the freedom that I claim be condemned by the scruples of another?
1CO 10:30 If, for my part, I take the food thankfully, why should I be abused for eating that for which I give thanks?
1CO 10:31 Whether, then, you eat or drink or whatever you do, do everything to the honour of God.
1CO 10:32 Do not cause offence either to Jews or Greeks or to the church of God;
1CO 10:33 for I, also, try to please everybody in everything, not seeking my own advantage, but do what is best for others, so that they may be saved.
1CO 11:1 Imitate me, as I myself imitate Christ.
1CO 11:2 I praise you, indeed, because you never forget me, and are keeping my injunctions in mind, exactly as I laid them on you.
1CO 11:3 But I am anxious that you should understand that the Christ is the head of every man, that man is the head of woman, and that God is the head of the Christ.
1CO 11:4 Any man who keeps his head covered, when praying or preaching in public, dishonours him who is his head;
1CO 11:5 while any woman, who prays or preaches in public bare-headed, dishonours him who is her head; for that is to make herself like one of the shameless women who shave their heads.
1CO 11:6 Indeed, if a woman does not keep her head covered, she may as well cut her hair short. But, since to cut her hair short, or shave it off, marks her as one of the shameless women, she should keep her head covered.
1CO 11:7 A man ought not to have his head covered, for he has been from the beginning the likeness of God and the reflection of his glory, but woman is the reflection of man’s glory.
1CO 11:8 For it was not man who was taken from woman, but woman who was taken from man.
1CO 11:9 Besides, man was not created for the sake of woman, but woman for the sake of man.
1CO 11:10 And, therefore, a woman ought to wear on her head a symbol of her subjection, because of the presence of the angels.
1CO 11:11 Still, when in union with the Lord, woman is not independent of man, or man of woman;
1CO 11:12 for just as woman came from man, so man comes by means of woman; and all things come from God.
1CO 11:13 Judge for yourselves. Is it fitting that a woman should pray to God in public with her head uncovered?
1CO 11:14 Does not nature herself teach us that, while for a man to wear his hair long is degrading to him,
1CO 11:15 a woman’s long hair is her glory? Her hair has been given her to serve as a covering.
1CO 11:16 If, however, anyone still thinks it right to contest the point – well, we have no such custom, nor have the churches of God.
1CO 11:17 In giving directions on the next subject, I cannot praise you; because your meetings do more harm than good.
1CO 11:18 To begin with, I am told that when you meet together as a church there are divisions among you. In part I believe this,
1CO 11:19 indeed, there must be parties among you, so that the people of real worth become known.
1CO 11:20 When you meet together, as I understand, it is not possible to eat the Lord’s Supper;
1CO 11:21 for, as you eat, each of you tries to secure his own supper first, with the result that one has too little to eat, and another has too much to drink!
1CO 11:22 Have you no houses in which you can eat and drink? Or are you trying to show your contempt for the church of God, and to humiliate the poor? What can I say to you? Should I praise you? In this matter I cannot praise you.
1CO 11:23 For I myself received from the Lord the account which I have in turn given to you – how the Lord Jesus, on the very night of his betrayal, took some bread,
1CO 11:24 and, after saying the thanksgiving, broke it and said ‘This is my own body given on your behalf. Do this in memory of me.’
1CO 11:25 And in the same way with the cup, after supper, saying ‘This cup is the new covenant made by my blood. Do this, whenever you drink it, in memory of me.’
1CO 11:26 For whenever you eat this bread and drink the cup, you proclaim the Lord’s death – until he comes.
1CO 11:27 Therefore, whoever eats the bread, or drinks the Lord’s cup, in an irreverent spirit, will have to answer for an offence against the Lord’s body and blood.
1CO 11:28 Let everyone look into their own heart, and only then eat of the bread and drink from the cup.
1CO 11:29 For the person who eats and drinks brings a judgment on themselves by their eating and drinking, when they do not discern the body.
1CO 11:30 That is why so many among you are weak and ill, and why some are sleeping.
1CO 11:31 But, if we judged ourselves rightly, we should not be judged.
1CO 11:32 Yet, in being judged by the Lord, we are undergoing discipline, so that we may not have judgment passed on us with the rest of the world.
1CO 11:33 Therefore, my friends, when you meet together to eat the Supper, wait for one another.
1CO 11:34 If anyone is hungry, they should eat at home, so that your meetings may not bring a judgment on you. The other details I will settle when I come.
1CO 12:1 In the next place, friends, I do not want you to be ignorant about spiritual gifts.
1CO 12:2 You know that there was a time when you were Gentiles, going astray after idols that could not speak, just as you happened to be led.
1CO 12:3 Therefore I tell you plainly that no one who speaks under the influence of the Spirit of God says “JESUS IS ACCURSED,” and that no one can say “JESUS IS LORD,” except under the influence of the Holy Spirit.
1CO 12:4 Gifts differ, but the Spirit is the same;
1CO 12:5 ways of serving differ, yet the Master is the same;
1CO 12:6 results differ, yet the God who brings about every result is in every case the same.
1CO 12:7 To each of us there is given spiritual illumination for the general good.
1CO 12:8 To one is given the power to speak with wisdom through the Spirit; to another the power to speak with knowledge, due to the same Spirit;
1CO 12:9 to another faith by the same Spirit; to another power to cure diseases by the one Spirit; to another supernatural powers;
1CO 12:10 to another the gift of preaching; to another the gift of distinguishing between true and false inspiration; to another varieties of the gift of “tongues”; to another the power to interpret “tongues.”
1CO 12:11 All these result from one and the same Spirit, who distributes his gifts to each individually as he wills.
1CO 12:12 For just as the human body is one whole, and yet has many parts, and all its parts, many though they are, form but one body, so it is with the Christ;
1CO 12:13 for it was by one Spirit that we were all baptised to form one body, whether Jews or Greeks, slaves or free, and were all imbued with one Spirit.
1CO 12:14 The human body, I repeat, consists not of one part, but of many.
1CO 12:15 If the foot says “Since I am not a hand, I do not belong to the body,” it does not because of that cease to belong to the body.
1CO 12:16 Or if the ear says “Since I am not an eye, I do not belong to the body,” it does not because of that cease to belong to the body.
1CO 12:17 If all the body were an eye, where would the hearing be? If it were all hearing, where would the sense of smell be?
1CO 12:18 But in fact God has placed each individual part just where he thought fit in the body.
1CO 12:19 If, however, they all made up only one part, where would the body be?
1CO 12:20 But in fact, although it has many parts, there is only one body.
1CO 12:21 The eye cannot say to the hand “I do not need you,” nor, again, the head to the feet “I do not need you.”
1CO 12:22 No! Those parts of the body that seem naturally the weaker are indispensable;
1CO 12:23 and those parts which we deem less honourable we surround with special honour; and our ungraceful parts receive a special grace which our graceful parts do not require.
1CO 12:24 Yes, God has so constructed the body – by giving a special honour to the part that lacks it –
1CO 12:25 As to secure that there should be no disunion in the body, but that the parts should show the same care for one another.
1CO 12:26 If one part suffers, all the others suffer with it, and if one part has honour done to it, all the others share its joy.
1CO 12:27 Together you are the body of Christ, and individually its parts.
1CO 12:28 In the church God has appointed, first, apostles, secondly preachers, thirdly teachers; then he has given supernatural powers, then power to cure diseases, aptness for helping others, capacity to govern, varieties of the gift of “tongues.”
1CO 12:29 Can everyone be an apostle? Can everyone be a preacher? Can everyone be a teacher? Can everyone have supernatural powers?
1CO 12:30 Can everyone have power to cure diseases? Can everyone speak in “tongues”? Can everyone interpret them?
1CO 12:31 Strive for the greater gifts. Yet I can still show you a way beyond all comparison the best.
1CO 13:1 Though I speak in the “tongues” of people, or even of angels, yet have not love, I have become mere echoing brass, or a clanging cymbal!
1CO 13:2 Even though I have the gift of preaching, and fathom all hidden truths and all the depths of knowledge; even though I have such faith as might move mountains, yet have not love, I am nothing!
1CO 13:3 Even though I dole my substance to the poor, even though I sacrifice my body in order to boast, yet have not love, it avails me nothing!
1CO 13:4 Love is long-suffering, and kind; love is never envious, never boastful, never conceited, never behaves unbecomingly;
1CO 13:5 love is never self-seeking, never provoked, never reckons up her wrongs;
1CO 13:6 love never rejoices at evil, but rejoices in the triumph of truth;
1CO 13:7 love bears with all things, ever trustful, ever hopeful, ever patient.
1CO 13:8 Love never fails. But, whether it be the gift of preaching, it will end; whether it be the gift of “tongues,” it will cease; whether it be knowledge, it, too, will vanish.
1CO 13:9 For our knowledge is incomplete, and our preaching is incomplete,
1CO 13:10 but, when the perfect has come, that which is incomplete will end.
1CO 13:11 When I was a child, I talked as a child, I felt as a child, I reasoned as a child; now that I am a man, I have done with childish ways.
1CO 13:12 As yet we see, in a mirror, dimly, but then – face to face! As yet my knowledge is incomplete, but then I will know in full, as I have been fully known.
1CO 13:13 Meanwhile faith, hope, and love endure – these three, but the greatest of these is love.
1CO 14:1 Seek this love earnestly, and strive for spiritual gifts, above all for the gift of preaching.
1CO 14:2 The person who, when speaking, uses the gift of “tongues” is speaking, not to people, but to God, for no one understands them; yet in spirit they are speaking of hidden truths.
1CO 14:3 But those who preach are speaking to their fellow men and women words that will build up faith, and give them comfort and encouragement.
1CO 14:4 Those who, when speaking, use the gift of “tongues” builds up their own faith, while those who preach build up the faith of the church.
1CO 14:5 Now I want you all to speak in “tongues,” but much more I wish that you should preach. A preacher is worth more than one who speaks in “tongues,” unless they interprets their words, so that the faith of the church may be built up.
1CO 14:6 This being so, friends, what good will I do you, if I come to you and speak in “tongues,” unless my words convey some revelation, or knowledge, or take the form of preaching or teaching?
1CO 14:7 Even with inanimate things, such as a flute or a harp, though they produce sounds, yet unless the notes are quite distinct, how can the tune played on the flute or the harp be recognised?
1CO 14:8 If the bugle sounds a doubtful call, who will prepare for battle?
1CO 14:9 And so with you; unless, in using the gift of “tongues,” you utter intelligible words, how can what you say be understood? You will be speaking to the winds!
1CO 14:10 There are, for instance, a certain number of different languages in the world, and not one of them fails to convey meaning.
1CO 14:11 If, however, I do not happen to know the language, I will be a foreigner to those who speak it, and they will be foreigners to me.
1CO 14:12 And so with you; since you are striving for spiritual gifts, be eager to excel in such as will build up the faith of the church.
1CO 14:13 Therefore anyone who, when speaking, uses the gift of “tongues” should pray for ability to interpret them.
1CO 14:14 If, when praying, I use the gift of “tongues,” my spirit indeed prays, but my mind is a blank.
1CO 14:15 What, then, is my conclusion? Simply this – I will pray with my spirit, but with my mind as well; I will sing with my spirit, but with my mind as well.
1CO 14:16 If you bless God with your spirit only, how can people in the congregation who are without your gift say “Amen” to your thanksgiving? They do not know what you are saying!
1CO 14:17 Your thanksgiving may be excellent, but the other is not helped by it.
1CO 14:18 Thank God, I use the gift of “tongues” more than any of you.
1CO 14:19 But at a meeting of the church I would rather speak five words with my mind, and so teach others, than ten thousand words when using the gift of “tongues.”
1CO 14:20 My friends, do not show yourselves children in understanding. In wickedness be infants, but in understanding show yourselves adults.
1CO 14:21 It is said in the Law – “In strange tongues and by the lips of strangers will I speak to this people, but even then they will not listen to me, says the Lord.”
1CO 14:22 Therefore the gift of the “tongues” is intended as a sign, not for those who believe in Christ, but for those who do not, while the gift of preaching is intended as a sign, not for those who do not believe in Christ, but for those who do.
1CO 14:23 So, when the whole church meets, if all present use the gift of “tongues,” and some people who are without the gift, or who are unbelievers, come in, will not they say that you are mad?
1CO 14:24 While, if all those present use the gift of preaching, and an unbeliever, or someone without the gift, comes in, they are convinced of their sinfulness by them all, they are called to account by them all;
1CO 14:25 the secrets of their heart are revealed, and then, throwing themselves on their face, they will worship God, and declare “God is indeed among you!”
1CO 14:26 What do I suggest, then, friends? Whenever you meet for worship, each of you comes, either with a hymn, or a lesson, or a revelation, or the gift of “tongues,” or the interpretation of them; let everything be directed to the building up of faith.
1CO 14:27 If any of you use the gift of “tongues,” not more than two, or at the most three, should do so – each speaking in his turn – and someone should interpret them.
1CO 14:28 If there is no one able to interpret what is said, they should remain silent at the meeting of the church, and speak to themselves and to God.
1CO 14:29 Of preachers two or three should speak, and the rest should weigh well what is said.
1CO 14:30 But, if some revelation is made to another person as he sits there, the first speaker should stop.
1CO 14:31 For you can all preach in turn, so that all may learn some lesson and all receive encouragement.
1CO 14:32 (The spirit that moves the preachers is within the preachers’ control;
1CO 14:33 for God is not a God of disorder, but of peace.) This custom prevails in all the churches of Christ’s people.
1CO 14:34 At the meetings of the church married women should remain silent, for they are not allowed to speak in public; they should take a subordinate place, as the Law itself directs.
1CO 14:35 If they want information on any point, they should ask their husbands about it at home; for it is unbecoming for a married woman to speak at a meeting of the church.
1CO 14:36 What! Did God’s message to the world originate with you? Or did it find its way to none but you?
1CO 14:37 If anyone thinks that he has the gift of preaching or any other spiritual gift, he should recognise that what I am now saying to you is a command from the Lord.
1CO 14:38 Anyone who ignores it may be ignored.
1CO 14:39 Therefore, my friends, strive for the gift of preaching, and yet do not forbid speaking in “tongues.”
1CO 14:40 Let everything be done in a proper and orderly manner.
1CO 15:1 Next, friends, I would like to remind you of the good news which I told you, and which you received – the good news on which you have taken your stand,
1CO 15:2 and by means of which you are being saved. I would like to remind you of the words that I used in telling it to you, since you are still holding fast to it, and since it was not in vain that you became believers in Christ.
1CO 15:3 For at the very beginning of my teaching I gave you the account which I had myself received – that Christ died for our sins (as the scriptures had foretold),
1CO 15:4 that he was buried, that on the third day he was raised (as the scriptures had foretold),
1CO 15:5 and that he appeared to Cephas, and then to the Twelve.
1CO 15:6 After that, he appeared to more than five hundred of his followers at one time, most of whom are still alive, though some have gone to their rest.
1CO 15:7 After that, he appeared to James, and then to all the apostles.
1CO 15:8 Last of all, he appeared even to me, who am, as it were, a miscarried baby – born untimely.
1CO 15:9 For I am the least of the apostles, I who am unworthy of the name of “apostle,” because I persecuted the church of God.
1CO 15:10 But it is through the love of God that I am what I am, and the love that he showed me has not been wasted. No, I have toiled harder than any of them, and yet it was not I, but the love of God working with me.
1CO 15:11 Whether, then, it was I or whether it was they, this we proclaim, and this you believed.
1CO 15:12 Now, if it is proclaimed of Christ that he has been raised from the dead, how is it that some of you say that there is no such thing as a resurrection of the dead?
1CO 15:13 But, if there is no such thing as a resurrection of the dead, then even Christ has not been raised;
1CO 15:14 and, if Christ has not been raised, then our proclamation is without meaning, and our faith without meaning also!
1CO 15:15 Yes, and we are being proved to have borne false testimony about God; for we testified of God that he raised the Christ, whom he did not raise, if, indeed, the dead do not rise!
1CO 15:16 For, if the dead do not rise, then even Christ himself has not been raised,
1CO 15:17 and, if Christ has not been raised, your faith is folly – your sins are on you still!
1CO 15:18 Yes, and they, who have passed to their rest in union with Christ, perished!
1CO 15:19 If all that we have done has been to place our hope in Christ for this life, then we of all people are the most to be pitied.
1CO 15:20 But, in truth, Christ has been raised from the dead, the first-fruits of those who are at rest.
1CO 15:21 For, since through a man there is death, so, too, through a man there is a resurrection of the dead.
1CO 15:22 For, as through union with Adam all die, so through union with the Christ will all be made to live.
1CO 15:23 But each in their proper order – Christ the first-fruits; afterwards, at his coming, those who belong to the Christ.
1CO 15:24 Then will come the end – when he surrenders the kingdom to his God and Father, having overthrown all other rule and all other authority and power.
1CO 15:25 For he must reign until God “has put all his enemies under his feet.”
1CO 15:26 The last enemy to be overthrown is death;
1CO 15:27 for God has placed all things under Christ’s feet. (But, when it is said that all things have been placed under Christ, it is plain that God is excepted who placed everything under him.)
1CO 15:28 And, when everything has been placed under him, the Son will place himself under God who placed everything under him, so that God may be all in all!
1CO 15:29 Again, what good will they be doing who are baptised on behalf of the dead? If it is true that the dead do not rise, why are people baptised on their behalf?
1CO 15:30 Why, too, do we risk our lives every hour?
1CO 15:31 Daily I face death – I swear it, friends, by the pride in you that I feel through my union with Christ Jesus, our Lord.
1CO 15:32 If with only human hopes I had fought in the arena at Ephesus, what should I have gained by it? If the dead do not rise, then let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we will die!
1CO 15:33 Do not be deceived. “Good character is marred by evil company.”
1CO 15:34 Wake up to a righteous life, and cease to sin. There are some who have no true knowledge of God. I speak in this way to shame you.
1CO 15:35 Someone, however, may ask “How do the dead rise? And in what body will they come?”
1CO 15:36 You foolish person! The seed you yourself sow does not come to life, unless it dies!
1CO 15:37 And when you sow, you sow not the body that will be, but a mere grain – perhaps of wheat, or something else.
1CO 15:38 God gives it the body that he pleases – to each seed its special body.
1CO 15:39 All forms of life are not the same; there is one for people, another for beasts, another for birds, and another for fish.
1CO 15:40 There are heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies; but the beauty of the heavenly bodies is not the beauty of the earthly.
1CO 15:41 There is a beauty of the sun, and a beauty of the moon, and a beauty of the stars; for even star differs from star in beauty.
1CO 15:42 It is the same with the resurrection of the dead. Sown a mortal body, it rises immortal; sown disfigured, it rises beautiful;
1CO 15:43 sown weak, it rises strong; sown a human body, it rises a spiritual body.
1CO 15:44 As surely as there is a human body, there is also a spiritual body.
1CO 15:45 That is what is meant by the words – “Adam, the first man, became a human being”; the last Adam became a life-giving spirit.
1CO 15:46 That which comes first is not the spiritual, but the human; afterwards comes the spiritual;
1CO 15:47 the first man was from the dust of the earth; the second man from heaven.
1CO 15:48 Those who are of the dust are like him who came from the dust; and those who are of heaven are like him who came from heaven.
1CO 15:49 And as we have borne the likeness of him who came from the dust, so let us bear the likeness of him who came from heaven.
1CO 15:50 This I say, friends – Flesh and blood can have no share in the kingdom of God, nor can the perishable share the imperishable.
1CO 15:51 Listen, I will tell you God’s hidden purpose! We will not all have passed to our rest, but we will all be transformed – in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
1CO 15:52 at the last trumpet-call; for the trumpet will sound, and the dead will rise immortal, and we, also, will be transformed.
1CO 15:53 For this perishable body of ours must put on an imperishable form, and this dying body a deathless form.
1CO 15:54 And, when this dying body has put on its deathless form, then indeed will the words of scripture come true –
1CO 15:55 “death has been swallowed up in victory! Where, Death, is your victory? Where, death, is your sting?”
1CO 15:56 It is sin that gives death its sting, and it is the Law that gives sin its power.
1CO 15:57 But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory, through Jesus Christ, our Lord.
1CO 15:58 Therefore, my dear friends, stand firm, unshaken, always diligent in the Lord’s work, for you know that, in union with him, your toil is not in vain.
1CO 16:1 With reference to the collection for Christ’s people, I want you to follow the instructions that I gave to the churches in Galatia.
1CO 16:2 On the first day of every week each of you should put by what he can afford, so that no collections need be made after I have come.
1CO 16:3 On my arrival, I will send any persons, whom you may authorise by letter, to carry your gift to Jerusalem;
1CO 16:4 and, if it appears to be worth while for me to go also, they will go with me.
1CO 16:5 I will come to you as soon as I have been through Macedonia – for I am going through Macedonia –
1CO 16:6 And I will probably make some stay with you or, perhaps, remain for the winter, so that you may yourselves send me on my way, wherever I may be going.
1CO 16:7 I do not propose to pay you a visit in passing now, for I hope to stay with you for some time, if the Lord permits.
1CO 16:8 I intend, however, staying at Ephesus until the Festival at the close of the Harvest;
1CO 16:9 for a great opening for active work has presented itself, and there are many opponents.
1CO 16:10 If Timothy comes, take care that he has no cause for feeling anxious while he is with you. He is doing the Master’s work no less than I am.
1CO 16:11 No one, therefore, should slight him. See him safely on his way to me, for I am expecting him with some of our friends.
1CO 16:12 As for our friend Apollos, I have often urged him to go to you with the others. He has, however, been very unwilling to do so as yet; but he will go as soon as he finds a good opportunity.
1CO 16:13 Be watchful; stand firm in your faith; be brave; be strong.
1CO 16:14 Let everything you do be done in a loving spirit.
1CO 16:15 I have another request to make of you, friends. You remember Stephanas and his household, and that they were the first-fruits gathered in from Greece, and set themselves to serve Christ’s people.
1CO 16:16 I want you, on your part, to show deference to such people as these, as well as to every fellow labourer and earnest worker.
1CO 16:17 I am glad Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus have come, for they have made up for your absence;
1CO 16:18 they have cheered my heart, and your hearts also. Recognise the worth of such people as these.
1CO 16:19 The churches in Roman Asia send you their greetings. Aquila and Prisca and the church that meets at their house send you many Christian greetings.
1CO 16:20 All of the Lord’s followers send you greetings. Greet one another with a sacred kiss.
1CO 16:21 I, Paul, add this greeting in my own handwriting.
1CO 16:22 Accursed be anyone who has no love for the Lord. THE LORD IS COMING.
1CO 16:23 May the blessing of the Lord Jesus be with you.
1CO 16:24 My love to all of you who are in union with Christ Jesus.
2CO 1:1 To the church of God in Corinth, and to all Christ’s people throughout Greece, from Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus, by the will of God, and from Timothy, who is also a follower.
2CO 1:2 May God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace.
2CO 1:3 Blessed is the God and Father of Jesus Christ our Lord, the all-merciful Father, the God ever ready to console,
2CO 1:4 who consoles us in all our troubles, so that we may be able to console those who are in any trouble with the consolation that we ourselves receive from him.
2CO 1:5 It is true that we have our full share of the sufferings of the Christ, but through the Christ we have also our full share of consolation.
2CO 1:6 If we meet with trouble, it is for the sake of your consolation and salvation; and, if we find consolation, it is for the sake of the consolation that you will experience when you are called to endure the sufferings that we ourselves are enduring;
2CO 1:7 and our hope for you remains unshaken. We know that, as you are sharing our sufferings, you will also share our consolation.
2CO 1:8 We want you, friends, to know that, in the troubles which befell us in Roman Asia, we were burdened altogether beyond our strength, so much so that we even despaired of life.
2CO 1:9 Indeed, we had the presentiment that we must die, so that we might rely, not on ourselves, but on God who raises the dead.
2CO 1:10 And from so imminent a death God delivered us, and will deliver us again; for in him we have placed our hopes of future deliverance, while you, also, help us by your prayers.
2CO 1:11 And then many lips will give thanks on our behalf for the blessing granted us in answer to many prayers.
2CO 1:12 Indeed, our main ground for satisfaction is this – Our conscience tells us that our conduct in the world, and still more in our relations with you, was marked by a purity of motive and a sincerity that were inspired by God, and was based, not on worldly policy, but on the help of God.
2CO 1:13 We never write anything to you other than what you will acknowledge to the very end –
2CO 1:14 And, indeed, you have already partly acknowledged it about us – that you have a right to be proud of us, as we will be proud of you, on the day of our Lord Jesus.
2CO 1:15 With this conviction in my mind, I planned to come to see you first, so that your pleasure might be doubled –
2CO 1:16 To visit you both on my way to Macedonia, and to come to you again on my return from Macedonia, and then to get you to send me on my way into Judea.
2CO 1:17 As this was my plan, where, pray, did I show any fickleness of purpose? Or do you think that my plans are formed on mere impulse, so that in the same breath I say “Yes” and “No”?
2CO 1:18 As God is true, the message that we brought you does not waver between “Yes” and “No”!
2CO 1:19 The Son of God, Christ Jesus, whom we – Silas, Timothy, and I – proclaimed among you, never wavered between “Yes” and “No.” With him it has always been “Yes.”
2CO 1:20 For, many as were the promises of God, in Christ is the “Yes” that fulfils them. Therefore, through Christ again, let the “Amen” rise, through us, to the glory of God.
2CO 1:21 God who brings us, with you, into close union with Christ, and who consecrated us,
2CO 1:22 also set his seal on us, and gave us his Spirit in our hearts as a pledge of future blessings.
2CO 1:23 But, as my life will answer for it, I call God to witness that it was to spare you that I deferred my visit to Corinth.
2CO 1:24 I do not mean that we are to dictate to you with regard to your faith; on the contrary, we work with you for your true happiness; indeed, it is through your faith that you are standing firm.
2CO 2:1 For my own sake, as well, I decided not to pay you another painful visit.
2CO 2:2 If it is I who cause you pain, why, who is there to cheer me, except the person whom I am paining?
2CO 2:3 So I wrote as I did because I was afraid that if I had come, I should have been pained by those who ought to have made me glad; for I felt sure that it was true of you all that my joy was in every case yours also.
2CO 2:4 I wrote to you in sore trouble and distress of heart and with many tears, not to give you pain, but to let you see how intense a love I have for you.
2CO 2:5 Now whoever has caused the pain has not so much pained me, as he has, to some extent – not to be too severe – pained every one of you.
2CO 2:6 The man to whom I refer has been sufficiently punished by the penalty inflicted by the majority of you;
2CO 2:7 so that now you must take the opposite course, and forgive and encourage him, or else he may be overwhelmed by the intensity of his pain.
2CO 2:8 So I entreat you to assure him of your love.
2CO 2:9 I had this further object, also, in what I wrote – to find out whether you might be relied on to be obedient in everything.
2CO 2:10 Anyone you forgive, I forgive them, too. Indeed, for my part, whatever I have forgiven (if I have had to forgive anything), I have forgiven for your sakes, in the presence of Christ,
2CO 2:11 so as to prevent Satan from taking advantage of us; for we are not ignorant of his devices.
2CO 2:12 When I went to the district round Troas to tell the good news of the Christ, even though there was an opening for serving the Master,
2CO 2:13 I could get no peace of mind because I failed to find Titus, my friend; so I took leave of the people there, and went on to Macedonia.
2CO 2:14 All thanks to God, who, through our union with the Christ, leads us in one continual triumph, and uses us to spread the sweet perfume of the knowledge of him in every place.
2CO 2:15 For we are the fragrance of Christ ascending to God – both among those who are in the path of salvation and among those who are in the path to ruin.
2CO 2:16 To the latter we are a stench which arises from death and tells of death; to the former a fragrance which arises from life and tells of life. But who is equal to such a task?
2CO 2:17 Unlike many people, we are not in the habit of making profit out of God’s message; but in all sincerity, and bearing God’s commission, we speak before him in union with Christ.
2CO 3:1 Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Or are we like some who need letters of commendation to you, or from you?
2CO 3:2 You yourselves are our letter – a letter written on our hearts, and one which everybody can read and understand.
2CO 3:3 All can see that you are a letter from Christ delivered by us, a letter written, not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not on tablets of stone, but on tablets of human hearts.
2CO 3:4 This, then, is the confidence in regard to God that we have gained through the Christ.
2CO 3:5 I do not mean that we are fit to form any judgment by ourselves, as if on our own authority;
2CO 3:6 our fitness comes from God, who himself made us fit to be assistants of a new covenant, of which the substance is, not a written Law, but a Spirit. For the written Law means death, but the Spirit gives life.
2CO 3:7 If the system of religion which involved death, embodied in a written Law and engraved on stones, began amid such glory, that the Israelites were unable to gaze at the face of Moses because of its glory, though it was but a passing glory,
2CO 3:8 will not the religion that confers the Spirit have still greater glory?
2CO 3:9 For, if there was a glory in the religion that involved condemnation, far greater is the glory of the religion that confers righteousness!
2CO 3:10 Indeed, that which then had glory has lost its glory, because of the glory which surpasses it.
2CO 3:11 And, if that which was to pass away was attended with glory, far more will that which is to endure be surrounded with glory!
2CO 3:12 With such a hope as this, we speak with all plainness;
2CO 3:13 unlike Moses, who covered his face with a veil, to prevent the Israelites from gazing at the disappearance of what was passing away.
2CO 3:14 But their minds were slow to learn. Indeed, to this very day, at the public reading of the old covenant, the same veil remains; only for those who are in union with Christ does it pass away.
2CO 3:15 But, even to this day, whenever Moses is read, a veil lies on their hearts.
2CO 3:16 Yet, whenever someone turns to the Lord, the veil is removed.
2CO 3:17 And the Lord is the Spirit, and, where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom.
2CO 3:18 And all of us, with faces from which the veil is lifted, seeing, as if reflected in a mirror, the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into his likeness, from glory to glory, as it is given by the Lord, the Spirit.
2CO 4:1 Therefore, since it is by God’s mercy that we are engaged in this ministry, we do not lose heart.
2CO 4:2 No, we have renounced the secrecy prompted by shame, refusing to adopt crafty ways, or to tamper with God’s message, and commending ourselves to everyone’s conscience, in the sight of God, by our exhibition of the truth.
2CO 4:3 And, even if the good news that we bring is veiled, it is veiled only in the case of those who are on the path to ruin –
2CO 4:4 people whose minds have been blinded by the God of this age, unbelievers as they are, so that the light from the good news of the glory of the Christ, who is the incarnation of God, should not shine for them.
2CO 4:5 (For it is not ourselves that we proclaim, but Christ Jesus, as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus’ sake.)
2CO 4:6 Indeed, the same God who said “Out of darkness light will shine,” has shone in on our hearts, so that we should bring out into the light the knowledge of the glory of God, seen in the face of Christ.
2CO 4:7 This treasure we have in these earthen vessels, so that its all-prevailing power may be seen to come from God, and not to be our own.
2CO 4:8 Though hard pressed on every side, we are never hemmed in; though perplexed, never driven to despair;
2CO 4:9 though pursued, never abandoned; though struck down, never killed!
2CO 4:10 We always bear on our bodies the marks of the death that Jesus died, so that the life also of Jesus may be exhibited in our bodies.
2CO 4:11 Indeed, we who still live are continually being given over to death for Jesus’ sake, so that the life also of Jesus may be exhibited in our mortal nature.
2CO 4:12 And so, while death is at work within us, life is at work within you.
2CO 4:13 But, in the same spirit of faith as that expressed in the words – “I believed, and therefore I spoke,” we, also believe, and therefore speak.
2CO 4:14 For we know that he who raised the Lord Jesus will raise us also with him, and will bring us, with you, into his presence.
2CO 4:15 For all this is for your sakes, so that the loving kindness of God, spreading from heart to heart, may cause yet more hearts to overflow with thanksgiving, to his glory.
2CO 4:16 Therefore, as I said, we do not lose heart. No, even though outwardly we are wasting away, yet inwardly we are being renewed day by day.
2CO 4:17 The light burden of our momentary trouble is preparing for us a weight of imperishable glory, beyond all measure.
2CO 4:18 We, all the while, gaze not on what is seen, but on what is unseen. For what is seen is transient, but what is unseen is imperishable.
2CO 5:1 For we know that if our tent – that earthly body which is now our home – is taken down, we have a house of God’s building, a home not made by hands, imperishable, in heaven.
2CO 5:2 Even while in our present body we sigh, longing to put over it our heavenly house,
2CO 5:3 sure that, when we have put it on, we will never be found naked.
2CO 5:4 For we who are in this tent sigh under our burden, unwilling to take it off, yet wishing to put our heavenly body over it, so that all that is mortal may be absorbed in life.
2CO 5:5 And he who has prepared us for this change is God, who has also given us his Spirit as a pledge.
2CO 5:6 Therefore we are always confident, knowing that, while our home is in the body, we are absent from our home with the Lord.
2CO 5:7 For we guide our lives by faith, and not by what we see.
2CO 5:8 And in this confidence we would gladly leave our home in the body, and make our home with the Lord.
2CO 5:9 Therefore, whether in our home or absent from our home, our one ambition is to please him.
2CO 5:10 For at the court of the Christ we must all appear in our true characters, so that each may reap the results of the life which he has lived in the body, in accordance with his actions – whether good or worthless.
2CO 5:11 Therefore, because we know the fear inspired by the Lord, it is true that we are trying to win people over, but our motives are plain to God; and I hope that in your inmost hearts they are plain to you also.
2CO 5:12 We are not ‘commending ourselves’ again to you, but rather are giving you cause for pride in us, so that you may have an answer ready for those who pride themselves on appearances and not on character.
2CO 5:13 For, if we were ‘beside ourselves,’ it was in God’s service! If we are not in our senses, it is in yours!
2CO 5:14 It is the love of the Christ which compels us, when we reflect that, as one died for all, therefore all died;
2CO 5:15 and that he died for all, so that the living should no longer live for themselves, but for him who died and rose for them.
2CO 5:16 For ourselves, then, from this time forward, we refuse to regard anyone from the world’s standpoint. Even if we once thought of Christ from the standpoint of the world, yet now we do so no longer.
2CO 5:17 Therefore, if anyone is in union with Christ, he is a new being! His old life has passed away; a new life has begun!
2CO 5:18 But all this is the work of God, who reconciled us to himself through Christ, and gave us the ministry of reconciliation –
2CO 5:19 To proclaim that God, in Christ, was reconciling the world to himself, not reckoning people’s offences against them, and that he had entrusted us with the message of this reconciliation.
2CO 5:20 It is, then, on Christ’s behalf that we are acting as ambassadors, God, as it were, appealing to you through us. We implore you on Christ’s behalf – Be reconciled to God.
2CO 5:21 For our sake God made Christ, who was innocent of sin, one with our sinfulness, so that in him we might be made one with the righteousness of God.
2CO 6:1 Therefore, as God’s fellow workers, we also appeal to you not to receive his loving kindness in vain.
2CO 6:2 For he says – “At the time for acceptance I listened to you, and on the day of deliverance I helped you.” Now is the time for acceptance! Now is the day of deliverance!
2CO 6:3 Never do we put an obstacle in anyone’s way, so that no fault may be found with our ministry.
2CO 6:4 No, we are trying to commend ourselves under all circumstances, as God’s assistants should – in many an hour of endurance, in troubles, in hardships, in difficulties,
2CO 6:5 in floggings, in imprisonments, in riots, in toils, in sleepless nights, in hunger;
2CO 6:6 by purity, by knowledge, by patience, by kindliness, by holiness of spirit, by unfeigned love;
2CO 6:7 by the message of truth, and by the power of God; by the weapons of righteousness in the right hand and in the left;
2CO 6:8 amid honour and disrepute, amid slander and praise; regarded as deceivers, yet proved to be true;
2CO 6:9 as unknown, yet well-known; as at death’s door, yet, see, we are living; as chastised, yet not killed;
2CO 6:10 as saddened, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet enriching many; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things!
2CO 6:11 We have been speaking freely to you, dear friends in Corinth; we have opened our heart;
2CO 6:12 there is room there for you, yet there is not room, in your love, for us.
2CO 6:13 Can you not in return – I appeal to you as I should to children – open your hearts to us?
2CO 6:14 Do not enter into inconsistent relations with those who reject the faith. For what partnership can there be between righteousness and lawlessness? Or what has light to do with darkness?
2CO 6:15 What harmony can there be between Christ and Belial? Or what can those who accept the faith have in common with those who reject it?
2CO 6:16 What agreement can there be between a temple of God and idols? And we are a temple of the living God. That is what God meant when he said – “I will live among them, and walk among them; and I will be their God, and they will be my people.
2CO 6:17 Therefore ‘Come out from among the nations, and separate yourselves from them,’ says the Lord, ‘And touch nothing impure; and I will welcome you;
2CO 6:18 and I will be a father to you, and you will be my sons and daughters,’ says the Lord, the Ruler of all.”
2CO 7:1 With these promises, dear friends, let us purify ourselves from everything that pollutes either body or spirit, and, in deepest respect for God, aim at perfect holiness.
2CO 7:2 Make room for us in your hearts. In no instance have we ever wronged, or harmed, or taken advantage of, anyone.
2CO 7:3 I am not saying this to condemn you. Indeed, I have already said that you are in our heart, to live and die together.
2CO 7:4 I have the utmost confidence in you; I am always boasting about you. I am full of encouragement and, in spite of all our troubles, my heart is overflowing with happiness.
2CO 7:5 Ever since we reached Macedonia, we have had no rest in body or mind; on every side there have been troubles – conflicts without, anxieties within.
2CO 7:6 But God, who encourages the downcast, has encouraged us by the arrival of Titus.
2CO 7:7 And it is not only by his arrival that we are encouraged, but also by the encouragement which he received from you; for he tells us of your strong affection, your penitence, and your zeal on my behalf – so that I am happier still.
2CO 7:8 For, though I caused you sorrow by my letter, I do not regret it. Even if I were inclined to regret it – for I see that my letter did cause you sorrow though only for a time –
2CO 7:9 I am glad now; not because of the sorrow it caused you, but because your sorrow brought you to repentance. For it was God’s will that you should feel sorrow, in order that you should not suffer loss in any way at our hands.
2CO 7:10 For, when sorrow is in accordance with God’s will, it results in a repentance leading to salvation, and which will never be regretted. The sure result of the sorrow that the world knows is death.
2CO 7:11 For see what results that other sorrow – sorrow in accordance with God’s will – has had in your case. What earnestness it produced! What explanations! What strong feeling! What alarm! What longing! What eagerness! What readiness to punish! You have proved yourselves altogether free from guilt in that matter.
2CO 7:12 So, then, even though I did write to you, it was not for the sake of the wrongdoer, or of the man who was wronged, but to make you conscious, in the sight of God, of your own earnest care for us. And it is this that has encouraged us.
2CO 7:13 In addition to the encouragement that this gave us, we were made far happier still by the happiness of Titus for his heart has been cheered by you all.
2CO 7:14 Although I have been boasting a little to him about you, you did not put me to shame; but, just as every thing we had said to you was true, so our boasting to Titus about you has also proved to be the truth.
2CO 7:15 And his affection for you is all the greater, as he remembers the deference that you all showed him, and recalls how you received him with anxious care.
2CO 7:16 I am glad that I can feel perfect confidence in you.
2CO 8:1 We want to remind you, friends, of the love that God has shown to the churches in Macedonia –
2CO 8:2 How, tired though they were by many a trouble, their overflowing happiness, and even their deep poverty, resulted in a flood of generosity.
2CO 8:3 I can bear witness that to the full extent of their power, and even beyond their power, spontaneously,
2CO 8:4 and with many an appeal to us for permission, they showed their love, and contributed their share towards the fund for their fellow Christians.
2CO 8:5 And that, not only in the way we had expected; but first they gave themselves to the Lord, and to us also, in accordance with God’s will.
2CO 8:6 And this led us to beg Titus, that since he had started the work for you, he should also see to the completion of this expression of your love.
2CO 8:7 And, remembering how you excel in everything – in faith, in teaching, in knowledge, in unfailing earnestness, and in the affection that we have awakened in you – I ask you to excel also in this expression of your love.
2CO 8:8 I am not laying a command on you, but I am making use of the earnestness shown by others to test the genuineness of your affection.
2CO 8:9 For you do not forget the loving kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ – how that for your sakes, although he was rich, he became poor, so that you also might become rich through his poverty.
2CO 8:10 I am only making suggestions on this matter; for this is the best course for you, since you were a year before others, not only in taking action, but also in showing your readiness to do so.
2CO 8:11 And now I want you to complete the work, so that its completion may correspond with your willing readiness – in proportion, of course, to your means.
2CO 8:12 For, where there is willingness, a person’s gift is valued by its comparison with what they have, and not with what they do not have.
2CO 8:13 For our object is not to give relief to others and bring distress on you. It is a matter of a fair balance.
2CO 8:14 On this occasion what you can spare will supply what they need, at another time what they can spare may supply your need, and so things will be equal.
2CO 8:15 As scripture says – “Those who had much had nothing over, and those who had little did not lack!”
2CO 8:16 I thank God for inspiring Titus with the same keen interest in your welfare that I have;
2CO 8:17 for Titus has responded to my appeals and, in his great earnestness, is starting to go to you of his own accord.
2CO 8:18 We are sending with him one of the Lord’s followers whose fame in the service of the good news has spread through all the churches;
2CO 8:19 and not only that, but he has been elected by the churches to accompany us on our journey, in connexion with this expression of your love, which we are personally administering to the honour of the Lord, and to show our deep interest.
2CO 8:20 What we are specially guarding against is that any fault should be found with us in regard to our administration of this charitable fund;
2CO 8:21 for we are trying to make arrangements which will be right, not only in the eyes of the Lord, but also in the eyes of people.
2CO 8:22 We are also sending with them another of our friends, whose earnestness we have many a time proved in many ways, and whom we now find made even more earnest by his great confidence in you.
2CO 8:23 If I must say anything about Titus, he is my intimate companion, and he shares my work for you; if it is our friends, they are delegates of the churches, an honour to Christ.
2CO 8:24 Show them, therefore – so that the churches may see it – the proof of your affection, and the ground for our boasting to them about you.
2CO 9:1 With reference, indeed, to the fund for your fellow Christians, it is quite superfluous for me to say anything to you.
2CO 9:2 I know, of course, your willingness to help, and I am always boasting of it to the Macedonians. I tell them that you in Greece have been ready for a year past; and it was really your zeal that stimulated most of them.
2CO 9:3 So my reason for sending our friends is to prevent what we said about you from proving, in this particular matter, an empty boast, and to enable you to be as well prepared as I have been saying that you are.
2CO 9:4 Otherwise, if any Macedonians were to come with me, and find you unprepared, we – to say nothing of you – should feel ashamed of our present confidence.
2CO 9:5 Therefore I think it necessary to beg the friends to go to you in advance, and to complete the arrangements for the gift, which you have already promised, so that it may be ready, as a gift, before I come, and not look as if it were being given under pressure.
2CO 9:6 Remember the saying – “Scanty sowing, scanty harvest; plentiful sowing, plentiful harvest.”
2CO 9:7 Let everyone give as he has determined before hand, not grudgingly or under compulsion; for God loves a cheerful giver.
2CO 9:8 God has power to shower all kinds of blessings on you, so that, having, under all circumstances and on all occasions, all that you can need, you may be able to shower all kinds of benefits on others.
2CO 9:9 (As scripture says – “He shared freely, he gave to the poor; his righteousness continues for ever.”
2CO 9:10 And he who supplies seed to the sower, and bread for eating, will supply you with seed, and cause it to increase, and will multiply the fruits of your righteousness).
2CO 9:11 Rich in all things yourselves, you will be able to show liberality to all, which, with our help, will cause thanksgiving to be offered to God.
2CO 9:12 For the rendering of a public service such as this, not only relieves the needs of your fellow Christians, but also results in the offering to God of many a thanksgiving.
2CO 9:13 Through the evidence afforded by the service rendered, you cause people to praise God for your fidelity to your profession of faith in the good news of the Christ, as well as for the liberality of your contributions for them and for all others.
2CO 9:14 And they also, in their prayers for you, express their longing to see you, because of the surpassing love of God displayed toward you.
2CO 9:15 All thanks to God for his inestimable gift!
2CO 10:1 Now, I, Paul, make a personal appeal to you by the meekness and gentleness of the Christ – I who, ‘in your presence, am humble in my bearing towards you, but, when absent, am bold in my language to you’ –
2CO 10:2 I implore you not to drive me to ‘show my boldness,’ when I do come, by the confident tone which I expect to have to adopt towards some of you, who are expecting to find us influenced in our conduct by earthly motives.
2CO 10:3 For, though we live an earthly life, we do not wage an earthly war.
2CO 10:4 The weapons for our warfare are not earthly, but, under God, are powerful enough to pull down strongholds.
2CO 10:5 We are engaged in confuting arguments and pulling down every barrier raised against the knowledge of God. We are taking captive every hostile thought, to bring it into submission to the Christ,
2CO 10:6 and are fully prepared to punish every act of rebellion, when once your submission is complete.
2CO 10:7 You look at the outward appearance of things! Let anyone, who is confident that he belongs to Christ, reflect, for himself, again on the fact – that we belong to Christ no less than he does.
2CO 10:8 Even if I boast extravagantly about our authority – which the Lord gave us for building up your faith and not for overthrowing it – still I have no reason to be ashamed.
2CO 10:9 I say this so that it doesn’t seem as if I am trying to overawe you by my letters.
2CO 10:10 For people say ‘His letters are impressive and vigorous, but his personal appearance is insignificant and his speaking contemptible.’
2CO 10:11 Let such a person be assured of this – that our words in our letters show us to be, when absent, just what our deeds will show us to be, when present.
2CO 10:12 We have not indeed the audacity to class or compare ourselves with some of those who indulge in self-commendation! But, when such persons measure themselves by themselves, and compare themselves with themselves, they show a want of wisdom.
2CO 10:13 We, however, will not give way to unlimited boasting, but will confine ourselves to the limits of the sphere to which God limited us, when he permitted us to come as far as Corinth.
2CO 10:14 For it is not the case, as it would be if we were not in the habit of coming to you, that we are exceeding our bounds! Why, we were the very first to reach you with the good news of the Christ!
2CO 10:15 Our boasting, therefore, is not unlimited, nor does it extend to the labours of others; but our hope is that, as your faith grows, our influence among you may be very greatly increased – though still confined to our sphere –
2CO 10:16 So that we will be able to tell the good news in the districts beyond you, without trespassing on the sphere assigned to others, or boasting of what has been already done.
2CO 10:17 Let anyone who boasts make their boast of the Lord.
2CO 10:18 For it is not those who commend themselves that stand the test, but those who are commended by the Lord.
2CO 11:1 I could wish that you would tolerate a little folly in me! But indeed you do tolerate me.
2CO 11:2 I am jealous over you with the jealousy of God. For I promised you in marriage as a pure bride, to one husband – the Christ.
2CO 11:3 Yet I fear that it may turn out that, just as the snake by his craftiness deceived Eve, so your minds may have lost the loyalty and purity due from you to the Christ.
2CO 11:4 For, if some newcomer is proclaiming a Jesus other than him whom we proclaimed, or if you are receiving a Spirit different from the Spirit which you received, or a good news different from that which you welcomed, then you are marvellously tolerant!
2CO 11:5 I do not regard myself as in any way inferior to the most eminent apostles!
2CO 11:6 Though I am no trained orator, yet I am not without knowledge; indeed we made this perfectly clear to you in every way.
2CO 11:7 Perhaps you say that I did wrong in humbling myself that you might be exalted – I mean because I told you God’s good news without payment.
2CO 11:8 I robbed other churches by taking pay from them, so that I might serve you!
2CO 11:9 And, when I was with you in need, I did not become a burden to any of you; for our friends, on coming from Macedonia, supplied my needs. I kept myself, and will keep myself from being an expense to you in any way.
2CO 11:10 As surely as I know anything of the truth of Christ, this boast, as far as I am concerned, will not be stopped in any part of Greece.
2CO 11:11 Why? Because I do not love you? God knows that I do!
2CO 11:12 What I am doing now I will continue to do in order to cut away the ground from under those who are wishing for some ground for attacking me, so that as regards the thing of which they boast they may appear in their true characters, just as we do.
2CO 11:13 Such people are false apostles, treacherous workers, disguising themselves as apostles of Christ!
2CO 11:14 And no wonder; for even Satan disguises himself as an angel of light.
2CO 11:15 It is not surprising, therefore, if his servants also disguise themselves as servants of righteousness. But their end will be in accordance with their actions.
2CO 11:16 I say again – Let no one think me a fool! Yet, if you do, at least welcome me as you would a fool, so that I, too may indulge in a little boasting.
2CO 11:17 When I speak like this, I am not speaking as the Master would, but as a fool might, in boasting so confidently.
2CO 11:18 As so many are boasting of earthly things, I, too, will boast.
2CO 11:19 For all your cleverness, you tolerate fools willingly enough!
2CO 11:20 You tolerate a person even when they enslave you, when they plunder you, when they get you into their power, when they put on airs of superiority, when they strike you in the face!
2CO 11:21 I admit, to my shame, that we have been weak. But whatever the subject on which others are not afraid to boast – though it is foolish to say so – I am not afraid either!
2CO 11:22 Are they Hebrews? So am I! Are they Israelites? So am I! Are they descendants of Abraham? So am I!
2CO 11:23 Are they “Servants of Christ”? Though it is madness to talk like this, I am more so than they! I have had more of toil, more of imprisonment! I have been flogged times without number. I have been often at death’s door.
2CO 11:24 Five times I received at the hands of my own people forty lashes, all but one.
2CO 11:25 Three times I was beaten with rods. Once I was stoned. Three times I was shipwrecked. I have spent a whole day and night in the deep.
2CO 11:26 My journeys have been many. I have been through dangers from rivers, dangers from robbers, dangers from my own people, dangers from the Gentiles, dangers in towns, dangers in the country, dangers on the sea, dangers among people pretending to be followers of the Lord.
2CO 11:27 I have been through toil and hardship. I have passed many a sleepless night; I have endured hunger and thirst; I have often been without food; I have known cold and nakedness.
2CO 11:28 And, not to speak of other things, there is my daily burden of anxiety about all the churches.
2CO 11:29 Who is weak without my being weak? Who is led astray without my burning with indignation?
2CO 11:30 If I must boast, I will boast of things which show my weakness!
2CO 11:31 The God and Father of the Lord Jesus – he who is for ever blessed – knows that I am speaking the truth.
2CO 11:32 When I was in Damascus, the Governor under King Aretas had the gates of that city guarded, so as to arrest me,
2CO 11:33 but I was let down in a basket through a window in the wall, and so escaped his hands.
2CO 12:1 I must boast! It is unprofitable; but I will pass to visions and revelations given by the Lord.
2CO 12:2 I know a man in union with Christ, who, fourteen years ago – whether in the body or out of the body I do not know; God knows – was caught up (this man of whom I am speaking) to the third heaven.
2CO 12:3 And I know that this man – whether in the body or separated from the body I do not know; God knows –
2CO 12:4 Was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable things of which no human being may tell.
2CO 12:5 About such a man I will boast, but about myself I will not boast except as regards my weaknesses.
2CO 12:6 Yet if I choose to boast, I will not be a fool; for I will be speaking no more than the truth. But I refrain, in case anyone should credit me with more than he can see in me or hear from me, and because of the marvellous character of the revelations.
2CO 12:7 It was for this reason, and to prevent my thinking too highly of myself, that a thorn was sent to pierce my flesh – an instrument of Satan to discipline me – so that I should not think too highly of myself.
2CO 12:8 About this I three times entreated the Lord, praying that it might leave me.
2CO 12:9 But his reply has been – “My help is enough for you; for my strength attains its perfection in the midst of weakness.” Most gladly, then, will I boast all the more of my weaknesses, so that the strength of the Christ may overshadow me.
2CO 12:10 That is why I delight in weakness, ill treatment, hardship, persecution, and difficulties, when borne for Christ. For, when I am weak, then it is that I am strong!
2CO 12:11 I have been ‘playing the fool!’ It is you who drove me to it. For it is you who ought to have been commending me! Although I am nobody, in no respect did I prove inferior to the most eminent apostles.
2CO 12:12 The marks of the true apostle were exhibited among you in constant endurance, as well as by signs, by marvels, and by miracles.
2CO 12:13 In what respect, I ask, were you treated worse than the other churches, unless it was that, for my part, I refused to become a burden to you? Forgive me the wrong I did to you!
2CO 12:14 Remember, this is the third time that I have made every preparation to come to see you, and I will refuse to be a burden to you; I want, not your money, but you. It is not the duty of children to put by for their parents, but of parents to put by for their children.
2CO 12:15 For my part, I will most gladly spend, and be spent, for your welfare. Can it be that the more intensely I love you the less I am to be loved?
2CO 12:16 You will admit that I was not a burden to you but you say that I was ‘crafty’ and caught you ‘by a trick’!
2CO 12:17 Do you assert that I took advantage of you through any of those whom I have sent to you?
2CO 12:18 I urged Titus to go, and I sent another follower with him. Did Titus take any advantage of you? Didn’t we live in the same Spirit, and tread in the same footsteps?
2CO 12:19 Have you all this time been fancying that it is to you that we are making our defence? No, it is in the sight of God, and in union with Christ, that we are speaking. And all this, dear friends, is to build up your characters;
2CO 12:20 for I am afraid that perhaps, when I come, I may find that you are not what I want you to be, and, on the other hand, that you may find that I am what you do not want me to be. I am afraid that I may find quarrelling, jealousy, ill feeling, rivalry, slandering, backbiting, self-assertion, and disorder.
2CO 12:21 I am afraid that, on my next visit, my God may humble me in regard to you, and that I may have to mourn over many who have long been sinning, and have not repented of the impurity, immorality, and sensuality, in which they have indulged.
2CO 13:1 For the third time I am coming to see you. By the word of two or three witnesses each statement will be established.
2CO 13:2 I have said it, and I say it again before I come, just as if I were with you on my second visit, though for the moment absent, I say to those who have been long sinning, as well as to all others – that if I come again, I will spare no one.
2CO 13:3 And that will be the proof, which you are looking for, that the Christ speaks through me. There is no weakness in his dealings with you. No, he shows his power among you.
2CO 13:4 For though his crucifixion was due to weakness, his life is due to the power of God. And we, also, are weak in his weakness, but with him we will live for you through the power of God.
2CO 13:5 Put yourselves to the test, to see whether you are holding to the faith. Examine yourselves. Surely you recognise this fact about yourselves – that Jesus Christ is in you! Unless indeed you cannot stand the test!
2CO 13:6 But I hope that you will recognise that we can stand the test.
2CO 13:7 We pray to God that you may do nothing wrong, not that we may be seen to stand the test, but that you may do what is right, even though we may seem not to stand the test.
2CO 13:8 We have no power at all against the truth, but we have power in the service of the truth.
2CO 13:9 We are glad when we are weak, if you are strong. And what we pray for is that you may become perfect.
2CO 13:10 This is my reason for writing as I am now doing, while I am away from you, so that, when I am with you, I may not act harshly in the exercise of the authority which the Lord gave me – and gave me for building up and not for pulling down.
2CO 13:11 And now, friends, goodbye. Aim at perfection; take courage; agree together; live in peace. And then God, the source of all love and peace, will be with you.
2CO 13:12 Greet one another with a sacred kiss.
2CO 13:13 All Christ’s people here send you their greetings.
2CO 13:14 May the blessing of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion with the Holy Spirit, be with you all.
GAL 1:1 To the churches in Galatia, from Paul, an apostle whose commission is not from any human authority and is given, not by human beings, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father who raised him from the dead;
GAL 1:2 and from all the followers of the Lord here.
GAL 1:3 May God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, bless you and give you peace. For Christ, to rescue us from this present wicked age,
GAL 1:4 gave himself for our sins, in accordance with the will of our God and Father,
GAL 1:5 to whom be ascribed all glory for ever and ever. Amen.
GAL 1:6 I am astonished at your so soon deserting him, who called you through the love of Christ, for a different “good news,”
GAL 1:7 which is really no good news at all. But then, I know that there are people who are harassing you, and who want to pervert the good news of the Christ.
GAL 1:8 Yet even if we – or if an angel from heaven were to tell you any other “good news” than that which we told you, may he be accursed!
GAL 1:9 We have said it before, and I repeat it now – If anyone tells you a “good news” other than that which you received, may he be accursed!
GAL 1:10 Is this, I ask, trying to conciliate people, or God? Am I seeking to please people? If I were still trying to please people, I should not be a servant of Christ.
GAL 1:11 I remind you, friends, that the good news which I told is no mere human invention.
GAL 1:12 I, at least, did not receive it from any human being, nor was I taught it, but it came to me through a revelation made by Jesus Christ.
GAL 1:13 You heard, no doubt, of my conduct when I was devoted to Judaism – how I persecuted the church of God to an extent beyond belief, and tried to destroy it,
GAL 1:14 and how, in my devotion to Judaism, I surpassed many of my contemporaries among my own people in my intense earnestness in upholding the traditions of my ancestors.
GAL 1:15 But when God, who had set me apart even before my birth, and who called me by his love,
GAL 1:16 saw fit to reveal his Son in me, so that I might tell the good news of him among the Gentiles, then at once, instead of consulting any human being,
GAL 1:17 or even going up to Jerusalem to see those who were apostles before me, I went to Arabia, and came back again to Damascus.
GAL 1:18 Three years afterwards I went up to Jerusalem to make the acquaintance of Peter, and I stayed a fortnight with him.
GAL 1:19 I did not, however, see any other apostle, except James, the Master’s brother.
GAL 1:20 (As to what I am now writing to you, I call God to witness that I am speaking the truth).
GAL 1:21 Afterwards I went to the districts of Syria and Cilicia.
GAL 1:22 But I was still unknown even by sight to the Christian churches in Judea;
GAL 1:23 all that they had heard was – “The man who once persecuted us is now telling the good news of the faith of which he once tried to destroy.”
GAL 1:24 And they praised God for my sake.
GAL 2:1 Fourteen years afterwards I went up to Jerusalem again with Barnabas, and I took Titus also with me.
GAL 2:2 It was in obedience to a revelation that I went; and I laid before the apostles the good news that I am proclaiming among the Gentiles. I did this privately before those who are thought highly of because I was afraid that I might possibly be taking, or might have already taken, a course which would prove useless.
GAL 2:3 Yet even my companion, Titus, though a Greek, was not compelled to be circumcised.
GAL 2:4 But, because of those who pretended to be followers who had stolen in, the intruders who had crept in to spy on the liberty which we have through union with Christ Jesus, in order to bring us back to slavery –
GAL 2:5 Why, we did not for a moment yield submission to them, so that the truth of the good news might be yours always!
GAL 2:6 Of those who are thought somewhat highly of – what they once were makes no difference to me; God does not recognise human distinctions – those, I say, who are thought highly of added nothing to my message.
GAL 2:7 On the contrary, they saw that I had been entrusted with the good news for the Gentiles, just as Peter had been for the Jews.
GAL 2:8 For he who gave Peter power for his mission to the Jews gave me, also, power to go to the Gentiles.
GAL 2:9 Recognising the charge entrusted to me, James, Peter, and John, who were regarded as pillars of the church, openly acknowledged Barnabas and me as fellow workers, agreeing that we should go to the Gentiles, and they to the Jews.
GAL 2:10 Only we were to remember the poor – the thing I was myself anxious to do.
GAL 2:11 But, when Peter came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face; for he stood self-condemned.
GAL 2:12 Before certain persons came from James, he had been in the habit of eating with the Gentile converts; but, when they came, he began to withdraw and hold aloof, because he was afraid of offending those who still held to circumcision.
GAL 2:13 The rest of the Jewish converts were guilty of the same hypocrisy, so that even Barnabas was led away by it.
GAL 2:14 But, when I saw that they were not dealing straightforwardly with the truth of the good news, I said to Peter, before them all, ‘If you, who were born a Jew, adopt Gentile customs, instead of Jewish, why are you trying to compel the Gentile converts to adopt Jewish customs?’
GAL 2:15 We, though we are Jews by birth and not sinners of Gentile origin, know that no one is pronounced righteous as the result of obedience to Law, but only through faith in Christ Jesus.
GAL 2:16 So we placed our faith in Christ Jesus, in order that we might be pronounced righteous, as the result of faith in Christ, and not of obedience to Law; for such obedience will not result in even one soul’s being pronounced righteous.
GAL 2:17 If, while seeking to be pronounced righteous through union with Christ, we were ourselves seen to be sinners, would that make Christ an agent of sin? Heaven forbid!
GAL 2:18 For, if I rebuild the things that I pulled down, I prove myself to have done wrong.
GAL 2:19 I, indeed, through Law became dead to Law, in order to live for God.
GAL 2:20 I have been crucified with Christ. So it is no longer I that live, but it is Christ who lives in me; and, as for my present earthly life, I am living it by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.
GAL 2:21 I do not reject the love of God. If righteousness comes through Law, then there was no need for Christ to die!
GAL 3:1 Foolish Galatians! Who has been enchanting you – you before whose eyes Jesus Christ was depicted on the cross?
GAL 3:2 Here is the one thing that I want to find out from you – Did you receive the Spirit as the result of obedience to Law, or of your having listened with faith?
GAL 3:3 Can you be so foolish? After beginning with what is spiritual, do you now end with what is external?
GAL 3:4 Did you go through so much to no purpose? – if indeed it really was to no purpose!
GAL 3:5 He who supplies you abundantly with his Spirit and endows you with such powers – does he do this as the result of obedience to Law? Or as the result of your having listened with faith?
GAL 3:6 It is just as it was with Abraham – he had faith in God, and his faith was regarded by God as righteousness.
GAL 3:7 You see, then, that those whose lives are based on faith are the sons of Abraham.
GAL 3:8 And scripture, foreseeing that God would pronounce the Gentiles righteous as the result of faith, foretold the good news to Abraham in the words – “Through you all the Gentiles will be blessed.”
GAL 3:9 And, therefore, those whose lives are based on faith share the blessings bestowed on the faith of Abraham.
GAL 3:10 All who rely on obedience to Law are under a curse, for scripture says – “Cursed is everyone who does not abide by all that is written in the book of the Law, and do it.”
GAL 3:11 Again, it is evident that no one is pronounced righteous before God through Law, for we read – “Through faith the righteous will find life.”
GAL 3:12 But the Law is not based on faith; no, its words are – “Those who practice these precepts will find life through them.”
GAL 3:13 Christ ransomed us from the curse pronounced in the Law, by taking the curse on himself for us, for scripture says – “Cursed is anyone who is hanged on a tree.”
GAL 3:14 And this he did that the blessing given to Abraham might be extended to the Gentiles through their union with Jesus Christ; that so, through our faith, we also might receive the promised gift of the Spirit.
GAL 3:15 To take an illustration, friends, from daily life – No one sets aside even an agreement between two people, when once it has been confirmed, nor do they add conditions to it.
GAL 3:16 Now it was to Abraham that the promises were made, “and to his offspring.” It was not said “to his offsprings,” as if many persons were meant, but the words were “to your offspring,” showing that one person was meant – and that was Christ.
GAL 3:17 My point is this – An agreement already confirmed by God cannot be canceled by the Law, which came four hundred and thirty years later, so as to cause the promise to be set aside.
GAL 3:18 If our heritage is the result of Law, then it has ceased to be the result of a promise. Yet God conferred it on Abraham by a promise.
GAL 3:19 What, then, you ask, was the use of the Law? It was a later addition, to make people conscious of their wrongdoings, and intended to last only until the coming of that offspring to whom the promise had been made; and it was delivered through angels by a mediator.
GAL 3:20 Now mediation implies more than one person, but God is one only.
GAL 3:21 Does that set the Law in opposition to God’s promises? Heaven forbid! For, if a Law had been given capable of bestowing life, then righteousness would have actually owed its existence to Law.
GAL 3:22 But the words of scripture represent the whole world as being in bondage to sin, so that the promised blessing, dependent, as it is, on faith in Jesus Christ, may be given to those who have faith in him.
GAL 3:23 Before the coming of faith, we were kept under the guard of the Law, in bondage, awaiting the faith that was destined to be revealed.
GAL 3:24 Thus the Law has proved a guide to lead us to Christ, in order that we may be pronounced righteous as the result of faith.
GAL 3:25 But now that faith has come we no longer need a guide.
GAL 3:26 For you are all sons of God, through your faith in Christ Jesus.
GAL 3:27 For all of you who were baptised into union with Christ clothed yourselves with Christ.
GAL 3:28 All distinctions between Jew and Greek, slave and free, male and female, have vanished; for in union with Christ Jesus you are all one.
GAL 3:29 And, since you belong to Christ, it follows that you are Abraham’s offspring and, under the promise, sharers in the inheritance.
GAL 4:1 My point is this – as long as the heir is under age, there is no difference between him and a slave, though he is master of the whole estate.
GAL 4:2 He is subject to the control of guardians and stewards, during the period for which his father has power to appoint them.
GAL 4:3 And so is it with us; when we were under age, as it were, we were slaves to the puerile teaching of this world;
GAL 4:4 but, when the full time came, God sent his Son – born a woman’s child, born subject to Law –
GAL 4:5 to ransom those who were subject to Law, so that we might take our position as sons.
GAL 4:6 And it is because you are sons that God sent into our hearts the Spirit of his Son, with the cry – “Abba, our Father.”
GAL 4:7 You, therefore, are no longer a slave, but a son; and, if a son, then an heir also, by God’s appointment.
GAL 4:8 Yet formerly, in your ignorance of God, you became slaves to “gods” which were no gods.
GAL 4:9 But now that you have found God – or, rather, have been found by him – how is it that you are turning back to that poor and feeble puerile teaching, to which yet once again you are wanting to become slaves?
GAL 4:10 You are scrupulous in keeping days and months and seasons and years!
GAL 4:11 You make me fear that the labour which I have spent on you may have been wasted.
GAL 4:12 I entreat you, friends, to become like me, as I became like you. You have never done me any wrong.
GAL 4:13 You remember that it was owing to bodily infirmity that on the first occasion I told you the good news.
GAL 4:14 And as for what must have tried you in my condition, it did not inspire you with scorn or disgust, but you welcomed me as if I had been an angel of God – or Christ Jesus himself!
GAL 4:15 What has become then, of your blessings? For I can bear witness that, had it been possible, you would have torn out your eyes and given them to me!
GAL 4:16 Am I to think, then, that I have become your enemy by telling you the truth?
GAL 4:17 Certain people are seeking your favour, but with no honourable object. No, indeed, they want to isolate you, so that you will have to seek their favour.
GAL 4:18 It is always honourable to have your favour sought in an honourable cause, and not only when I am with you, my dear children –
GAL 4:19 you for whom I am again enduring a mother’s pains, until a likeness to Christ will have been formed in you.
GAL 4:20 But I could wish to be with you now and speak in a different tone, for I am perplexed about you.
GAL 4:21 Tell me, you who want to be still subject to Law – Why don’t you listen to the Law?
GAL 4:22 Scripture says that Abraham had two sons, one the child of the slave-woman and the other the child of the free woman.
GAL 4:23 But the child of the slave-woman was born in the course of nature, while the child of the free woman was born in fulfilment of a promise.
GAL 4:24 This story may be taken as an allegory. The women stand for two covenants. One covenant, given from Mount Sinai, produces a race of slaves and is represented by Hagar.
GAL 4:25 Hagar stands for Mount Sinai in Arabia, and represents the Jerusalem of today, for she and her children are in slavery.
GAL 4:26 But the Jerusalem above is free, and she it is who is our mother.
GAL 4:27 For scripture says – “Rejoice, you barren one, who have never given birth, break into shouts, you who are never in labour, for many are the children of her who is desolate – yes, more than of her who has a husband.”
GAL 4:28 As for ourselves, friends, we, like Isaac, are children born in fulfilment of a promise.
GAL 4:29 Yet at that time the child born in the course of nature persecuted the child born by the power of the Spirit; and it is the same now.
GAL 4:30 But what does the passage of scripture say? “Send away the slave-woman and her son; for the slave’s son will not be coheir with the son of the free woman.”
GAL 4:31 And so, friends, we are not children of a slave, but of her who is free.
GAL 5:1 It is for freedom that Christ set us free; stand firm therefore, and do not again be held under the yoke of slavery.
GAL 5:2 Understand that I, Paul, myself tell you that if you allow yourselves to be circumcised, Christ will avail you nothing.
GAL 5:3 I again declare to everyone who receives circumcision, that he binds himself to obey the whole Law.
GAL 5:4 You have severed yourselves from Christ – you who are seeking to be pronounced righteous through Law; you have fallen away from love.
GAL 5:5 For we, by the help of the Spirit, are eagerly waiting for the fulfilment of our hope – that we may be pronounced righteous as the result of faith.
GAL 5:6 If we are in union with Christ Jesus, neither is circumcision nor the omission of it anything, but faith, working through love, is everything.
GAL 5:7 You were once making good progress! Who has hindered you from obeying the truth?
GAL 5:8 The persuasion brought to bear on you does not come from him who calls you.
GAL 5:9 A little yeast leavens all the dough.
GAL 5:10 I, through my union with the Lord, am persuaded that you will learn to think with me. But the man who is disturbing your minds will have to bear his punishment, whoever he may be.
GAL 5:11 If I, friends, am still proclaiming circumcision, why am I still persecuted? It seems that the cross has ceased to be an obstacle!
GAL 5:12 I could even wish that the people who are unsettling you would go further still and mutilate themselves.
GAL 5:13 Remember, friends, to you the call came to give you freedom. Only, do not make your freedom an opportunity for self-indulgence but serve one another in a loving spirit.
GAL 5:14 Indeed, the whole Law has been summed up in this one precept – “You must love your neighbour as you love yourself.”
GAL 5:15 But, if you are continually wounding and preying on one another, take care that you are not destroyed by one another.
GAL 5:16 This is what I have to say – Let your steps be guided by the Spirit, and then you will never gratify the cravings of your earthly nature.
GAL 5:17 For these cravings of our earthly nature conflict with the Spirit, and the Spirit with our earthly nature – they are two contrary principles – so that you cannot do what you wish.
GAL 5:18 But, if you follow the guidance of the Spirit, you are not subject to Law.
GAL 5:19 The sins of our earthly nature are unmistakable. They are sins like these – sexual immorality, impurity, indecency,
GAL 5:20 idolatry, sorcery, quarrels, strife, jealousy, outbursts of passion, rivalries, dissensions, divisions,
GAL 5:21 feelings of envy, drunkenness, revelry, and the like. And I warn you, as I warned you before, that those who indulge in such things will have no place in the kingdom of God.
GAL 5:22 But the fruit produced by the Spirit is love, joy, peace, forbearance, kindliness, generosity, trustfulness, gentleness, self-control.
GAL 5:23 Against such things there is no law!
GAL 5:24 And those who belong to Jesus, the Christ, have already crucified their earthly nature, with its passions and its cravings.
GAL 5:25 Since our life is due to the Spirit, let us rule our conduct also by the Spirit.
GAL 5:26 Do not let us grow vain, and provoke or envy one another.
GAL 6:1 My friends, even if someone should be caught committing a sin, you who are spiritually minded should, in a gentle spirit, help them to recover themselves, taking care that you yourselves are not tempted.
GAL 6:2 Bear one another’s burdens, and so carry out the Law of the Christ.
GAL 6:3 If a person imagines themselves to be somebody, when they are really nobody, they deceive themselves.
GAL 6:4 Let everyone test their own work, and then their cause for satisfaction will be in themselves and not in a comparison with their neighbour;
GAL 6:5 for everyone must bear their own load.
GAL 6:6 The person, however, who is being instructed in the message ought always to share their blessings with their teacher.
GAL 6:7 Do not be deceived. God cannot be mocked. What a person sows that they will reap.
GAL 6:8 For the person who sows the field of their earthly nature will from that earthly nature reap corruption; while the one who sows the field of the spirit will from that spirit reap eternal life.
GAL 6:9 Let us never tire of doing right, for at the proper season we will reap our harvest, if we do not grow weary.
GAL 6:10 Therefore, I say, as the opportunity occurs, let us treat everyone with kindness, and especially members of the household of the faith.
GAL 6:11 See in what large letters I am writing with my own hand.
GAL 6:12 The people who are trying to compel you to be circumcised are the people who wish to appear to advantage in regard to outward observances. They do it only to avoid being persecuted for the cross of Jesus, the Christ
GAL 6:13 Even these men who are circumcised do not themselves keep the Law; yet they want you to be circumcised, so that they may boast of your observance of the rite.
GAL 6:14 But, for my part, may I never boast of anything except the cross of Jesus Christ, our Master, through whom the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.
GAL 6:15 For neither is circumcision nor the omission of it anything; but a new nature is everything.
GAL 6:16 May all who rule their conduct by this principle find peace and mercy – they who are the Israel of God.
GAL 6:17 For the future let no one trouble me; for I bear the marks of Jesus branded on my body.
GAL 6:18 May the blessing of Jesus Christ, our Lord, rest on your souls, friends. Amen.
EPH 1:1 To Christ’s people at Ephesus who are faithful to him, from Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus, by the will of God.
EPH 1:2 May God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace.
EPH 1:3 Blessed is the God and Father of Jesus Christ, our Lord, who has blessed us on high with every spiritual blessing, in Christ.
EPH 1:4 For he chose us in our union with Christ before the creation of the universe, so that we might be holy and blameless in his sight, living in the spirit of love.
EPH 1:5 From the first he destined us, in his goodwill towards us, to be adopted as sons through Jesus Christ,
EPH 1:6 and so to enhance that glorious manifestation of his loving kindness which he gave us in the one he loves;
EPH 1:7 for in him, and through the shedding of his blood, we have found redemption in the pardon of our offences.
EPH 1:8 All this accords with the loving kindness which God lavished on us, accompanied by countless gifts of wisdom and discernment,
EPH 1:9 when he made known to us his hidden purpose. And it also accords with the goodwill which God purposed to exhibit in Christ,
EPH 1:10 in view of that divine order which was to mark the completion of the ages, when he should make everything, both in heaven and on earth, centre in him.
EPH 1:11 In him, I say, for by our union with him we became God’s heritage, having from the first been destined for this in the intention of him who, in all that happens, is carrying out his own fixed purpose;
EPH 1:12 that we should enhance his glory – we who have been the first to rest our hopes on the Christ.
EPH 1:13 And you, too, by your union with him, after you had heard the message of the truth, the good news of your salvation – you believed in him and were sealed as his by receiving the holy Spirit, which he had promised.
EPH 1:14 And the Spirit is a pledge of our future heritage, foreshadowing the full redemption of God’s own people – to enhance his glory.
EPH 1:15 And therefore I, ever since I heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus which prevails among you, and of your confidence in all Christ’s people,
EPH 1:16 have never omitted to thank God on your behalf, whenever I make mention of you in my prayers.
EPH 1:17 My prayer is that the God of Jesus Christ our Lord, the all-glorious Father, may inspire you with wisdom and true insight through a fuller knowledge of himself;
EPH 1:18 that your minds may be so enlightened that you may realise the hope given by God’s call, the wealth of the glory of his heritage among Christ’s people,
EPH 1:19 and the transcendent greatness of the power which he is able to exercise in dealing with us who believe in him.
EPH 1:20 The same mighty power was exerted on the Christ, when he raised the Christ from the dead and “caused him to sit at his right hand” on high, exalting him above all angels and archangels of every rank,
EPH 1:21 and above every name that can be named, whether in the present age, or in the age to come.
EPH 1:22 And God placed all things under Christ’s feet, and gave him to the church as its supreme head;
EPH 1:23 for the church is Christ’s body, and is filled by him who fills all things everywhere with his presence.
EPH 2:1 You yourselves were once dead because of your offences and sins.
EPH 2:2 For at one time you lived in sin, following the ways of the world, in subjection to the Ruler of the powers of the air – the Spirit who is still at work among the disobedient.
EPH 2:3 And it was among them that we all once lived our lives, indulging the cravings of our earthly nature, and carrying out the desires prompted by that earthly nature and by our own thoughts. Our nature exposed us to the divine wrath, like the rest of humanity.
EPH 2:4 Yet God, in his abundant compassion, and because of the great love with which he loved us,
EPH 2:5 even though we were dead because of our offences, gave life to us in giving life to the Christ. (By God’s loving kindness you have been saved.)
EPH 2:6 And, through our union with Christ Jesus, God raised us with him, and caused us to sit with him on high,
EPH 2:7 in order that, by his goodness to us in Christ Jesus, he might display in the ages to come the boundless wealth of his loving kindness.
EPH 2:8 For it is by God’s loving kindness that you have been saved, through your faith. It is not due to yourselves; the gift is God’s.
EPH 2:9 It is not due to obedience to Law, so that no one can boast.
EPH 2:10 For we are God’s handiwork, created, by our union with Christ Jesus, for the good actions in doing which God had pre-arranged that we should spend our lives.
EPH 2:11 Remember, therefore, that you were once Gentiles yourselves, as your bodies showed; you were called “the Uncircumcised” by those who were called “the Circumcised” – circumcised only by human hands!
EPH 2:12 Remember that you were at that time far from Christ; you were shut out from the citizenship of Israel; you were strangers to the covenants founded on God’s promise; you were in the world without hope and without God.
EPH 2:13 But now, through your union with Christ Jesus, you who once were far off have, by the shedding of the blood of the Christ, been brought near.
EPH 2:14 He it is who is our peace. He made the two divisions of humanity one, broke down the barrier that separated them,
EPH 2:15 and in his human nature put an end to the cause of enmity between them – the Law with its injunctions and ordinances – in order to create, through union with himself, from Jew and Gentile, one new humanity and so make peace.
EPH 2:16 And when, on the cross, he had destroyed their mutual enmity, he sought by means of his cross to reconcile them both to God, united in one body.
EPH 2:17 He came with the good news of peace for you who were far off, and of peace for those who were near;
EPH 2:18 for it is through him that we, the Jews and the Gentiles, united in the one Spirit, are now able to approach the Father.
EPH 2:19 It follows, then, that you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but are fellow citizens with Christ’s people and members of God’s household.
EPH 2:20 You have been built up on the foundation laid by the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the cornerstone.
EPH 2:21 United in him, every part of the building, closely joined together, will grow into a temple, consecrated by its union with the Lord.
EPH 2:22 And, through union in him, you also are being built up together, to be a place where God lives through the Spirit.
EPH 3:1 For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Jesus, the Christ, for the sake of you Gentiles –
EPH 3:2 For you have heard, I suppose, of the responsible charge with which God entrusted me for your benefit,
EPH 3:3 and also that it was by direct revelation that the hidden purpose of God was made known to me, as I have already briefly told you.
EPH 3:4 And, by reading what I have written, you will be able to judge how far I understand this hidden purpose of God in Christ.
EPH 3:5 In former generations it was not made known to humanity, as fully as it has now been revealed by the Spirit to the apostles and prophets among Christ’s people –
EPH 3:6 That, by union with Christ Jesus and through the good news, the Gentiles are coheirs with us and members of one body, and that they share with us in God’s Promise.
EPH 3:7 Of this good news I become an assistant, in virtue of the charge with which God entrusted me in the exercise of his power –
EPH 3:8 Yes, to me, who am less than the least of all Christ’s people, was this charge entrusted! – to tell the Gentiles the good news of the boundless wealth to be found in the Christ,
EPH 3:9 and to make clear what is God’s way of working out that hidden purpose which from the first has been concealed in the mind of the Creator of all things;
EPH 3:10 so that now to the archangels and to all the powers on high should be made known, through the church, the all-embracing wisdom of God,
EPH 3:11 in accordance with that purpose which runs through all the ages and which he has now accomplished in Jesus, the Christ, our Master.
EPH 3:12 And in union with him, and through our trust in him, we find courage to approach God with confidence.
EPH 3:13 Therefore I beg you not to be disheartened at the sufferings that I am undergoing for your sakes; for they redound to your honour.
EPH 3:14 For this reason, then, I kneel before the Father –
EPH 3:15 from whom all “fatherhood” in heaven and on earth derives its name –
EPH 3:16 and pray that, in proportion to the wealth of his glory, he will strengthen you with his power by breathing his Spirit into your inmost soul,
EPH 3:17 so that the Christ, through your faith, may make his home within your hearts in love; and I pray that you, now firmly rooted and established, may, with all Christ’s people,
EPH 3:18 have the power to comprehend in all its width and length and height and depth,
EPH 3:19 and to understand – though it surpasses all understanding – the love of the Christ; and so be filled with all the fullness of God.
EPH 3:20 To him who, through his power which is at work within us, is able to do far more than anything that we can ask or conceive –
EPH 3:21 to him be all glory through the church and through Christ Jesus, for all generations, age after age. Amen.
EPH 4:1 I beg you, then – I who am a prisoner in the Master’s cause – to live lives worthy of the call that you have received;
EPH 4:2 always humble and gentle, patient, bearing lovingly with one another,
EPH 4:3 and striving to maintain in the bond of peace the unity given by the Spirit.
EPH 4:4 There is but one body and one Spirit, just as there was but one hope set before you when you received your call.
EPH 4:5 There is but one Lord, one faith, one baptism.
EPH 4:6 There is but one God and Father of all – the God who is over all, pervades all, and is in all.
EPH 4:7 Everyone of us, however, has been entrusted with some charge, each in accordance with the extent of the gift of the Christ.
EPH 4:8 That is why it is said – “When he went up on high, he led his captives into captivity. And gave gifts to humanity.”
EPH 4:9 Now surely this “going up” must imply that he had already gone down into the world beneath.
EPH 4:10 He who went down is the same as he who went up – up beyond the highest heaven, so that he might fill all things with his presence.
EPH 4:11 And he it is who gave to the church apostles, prophets, missionaries, pastors, and teachers,
EPH 4:12 to fit his people for the work of the ministry, for the building up of the body of the Christ.
EPH 4:13 And this will continue, until we all attain to that unity which is given by faith and by a fuller knowledge of the Son of God; until we reach maturity – the full standard of the perfection of the Christ.
EPH 4:14 Then we will no longer be like infants, tossed backward and forward, blown about by every breath of human teaching and by people’s trickery and craftiness;
EPH 4:15 but holding the truth in a spirit of love, we will grow into complete union with him who is our head – Christ himself.
EPH 4:16 For from him the whole body, closely joined and knit together by the contact of every part with the source of its life, derives its power to grow, in proportion to the vigour of each individual part; and so is being built up in a spirit of love.
EPH 4:17 This, then, as one in union with the Lord, I implore: Do not continue to live such purposeless lives as the Gentiles live,
EPH 4:18 with their powers of discernment darkened, cut off from the life of God, owing to the ignorance that prevails among them and to the hardness of their hearts.
EPH 4:19 Lost to all sense of shame, they have abandoned themselves to licentiousness, in order to practice every kind of impurity without restraint.
EPH 4:20 But far different is the lesson you learned from the Christ – if, that is, you really listened to him,
EPH 4:21 and through union with him were taught the truth, as it is to be found in Jesus.
EPH 4:22 For you learned with regard to your former way of living that you must cast off your old nature, which, yielding to deluding passions, grows corrupt;
EPH 4:23 that the spirit of your minds must be constantly renewed;
EPH 4:24 and that you must clothe yourselves in that new nature which was created to resemble God, with the righteousness and holiness springing from the truth.
EPH 4:25 Since, therefore, you have cast off what is false, you must every one of you speak the truth to your neighbours. For we are united to one another like the parts of a body.
EPH 4:26 Be angry, yet do not sin. Do not let the sun go down on your anger;
EPH 4:27 and give no opportunity to the devil.
EPH 4:28 Let the person who steals steal no longer, but rather they should toil with their hands at honest work, so that they may have something to share with anyone in need.
EPH 4:29 Never let any foul word pass your lips, but only such good words as the occasion demands, so that they may be a help to those who hear them.
EPH 4:30 And do not grieve God’s Holy Spirit; for it was through that Spirit that God sealed you as his, against the day of redemption.
EPH 4:31 Let all bitterness, passion, anger, brawling, and abusive language be banished from among you, as well as all malice.
EPH 4:32 Be kind to one another, tenderhearted, ready to forgive one another, just as God, in Christ, forgave you.
EPH 5:1 Therefore imitate God, as his dear children,
EPH 5:2 and live a life of love, following the example of the Christ, who loved you and gave himself for you as an offering and a sacrifice to God, that should be fragrant and acceptable.
EPH 5:3 As for sexual immorality and every kind of impurity, or greed, do not let them even be mentioned among you, as befits Christ’s people,
EPH 5:4 nor shameful conduct, nor foolish talk or jesting, for they are wholly out of place among you; but rather thanksgiving.
EPH 5:5 For of this you may be sure – that no one who is unchaste or impure or greedy of gain (for to be greedy of gain is idolatry) has any place awaiting him in the kingdom of the Christ and God.
EPH 5:6 Do not let anyone deceive you with specious arguments. Those are the sins that bring down the wrath of God on the disobedient.
EPH 5:7 Therefore have nothing to do with such people.
EPH 5:8 For, although you were once in darkness, now, by your union with the Lord, you are in the light. Live as children of light –
EPH 5:9 for the outcome of life in the light may be seen in every form of goodness, righteousness, and sincerity –
EPH 5:10 always trying to find out what is pleasing to the Lord.
EPH 5:11 Take no part in deeds of darkness, from which no good can come; on the contrary, expose them.
EPH 5:12 It is degrading even to speak of the things continually done by them in secret.
EPH 5:13 All such actions, when exposed, have their true character made manifest by the light.
EPH 5:14 For everything that has its true character made manifest is clear as light. And that is why it is said – “Sleeper, awake! Arise from the dead, and the Christ will give you light!”
EPH 5:15 Take great care, then, how you live – not unwisely but wisely,
EPH 5:16 making the most of every opportunity; for these are evil days.
EPH 5:17 Therefore do not grow thoughtless, but try to understand what the Lord’s will is.
EPH 5:18 Do not drink wine to excess, for that leads to profligacy; but seek to be filled with the Spirit of God, and speak to one another in psalms and hymns and sacred songs.
EPH 5:19 Sing and make music in your hearts to the Lord.
EPH 5:20 Always give thanks for everything to our God and Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
EPH 5:21 Submit to one another because you honour and respect Christ.
EPH 5:22 Wives should submit to their husbands as submitting to the Lord.
EPH 5:23 For a man is the head of his wife, as the Christ is the head of the church – being indeed himself the Saviour of his body.
EPH 5:24 But as the church submits to the Christ, so also should wives submit to their husbands in everything.
EPH 5:25 Husbands, love your wives, just as the Christ loved the church, and gave himself for her,
EPH 5:26 to make her holy, after purifying her by the washing with the water, according to his promise;
EPH 5:27 so that he might himself bring the church, in all her beauty, into his own presence, with no spot or wrinkle or blemish of any kind, but that she might be holy and faultless.
EPH 5:28 That is how husbands ought to love their wives – as if they were their own bodies. A man who loves his wife is really loving himself;
EPH 5:29 for no one ever yet hated his own body. But everyone feeds his body and cares for it, just as the Christ for the church;
EPH 5:30 for we are members of his body.
EPH 5:31 For this cause a man will leave his father and mother, and be united to his wife; and the man and his wife will become one.
EPH 5:32 In this there is a profound truth – I am speaking of Christ and his church.
EPH 5:33 However, for you individually, let each love his wife as if she were himself; and the wife be careful to respect her husband.
EPH 6:1 Children, obey your parents, as children of the Lord; for that is but right.
EPH 6:2 “Honour your father and mother” – this is the first Commandment with a promise –
EPH 6:3 “so that you may prosper and have a long life on earth.”
EPH 6:4 And fathers, do not irritate your children, but bring them up with Christian discipline and instruction.
EPH 6:5 Slaves, obey your earthly masters, with anxious care, giving them ungrudging service, as if obeying the Christ;
EPH 6:6 not only when their eyes are on you, as if you had merely to please people, but as slaves of Christ, who are trying to carry out the will of God.
EPH 6:7 Give your service heartily and cheerfully, as working for the Master and not for people;
EPH 6:8 for you know that everyone will be rewarded by the Master for any honest work that he has done, whether he is a slave or free.
EPH 6:9 And masters, treat your slaves in the same spirit. Give up threatening them; for you know that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven, and that before him there is no distinction of rank.
EPH 6:10 For the future, find strength in your union with the Lord, and in the power which comes from his might.
EPH 6:11 Put on the full armour of God, so that you may be able to stand your ground against the stratagems of the devil.
EPH 6:12 For ours is no struggle against enemies of flesh and blood, but against all the various powers of evil that hold sway in the darkness around us, against the spirits of wickedness on high.
EPH 6:13 Therefore take up the full armour of God, so that when the evil day comes, you may be able to withstand the attack, and, having fought to the end, still to stand your ground.
EPH 6:14 Stand your ground, then, with truth for your belt, and with righteousness for your breastplate,
EPH 6:15 and with the readiness to serve the good news of peace as shoes for your feet.
EPH 6:16 At every onslaught take up faith for your shield; for with it you will be able to extinguish all the flaming darts of the evil one.
EPH 6:17 And receive the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit – which is the message of God – always with prayer and supplication.
EPH 6:18 Pray in spirit at all times. Be intent on this, with unwearying perseverance and supplication for all Christ’s people –
EPH 6:19 and on my behalf also, so that when I begin to speak, words may be given me, so that I may fearlessly make known the inmost truth of the good news,
EPH 6:20 on behalf of which I am an ambassador – in chains! Pray that, in telling it, I may speak fearlessly as I ought.
EPH 6:21 To enable you, as well as others, to know all that concerns me and what I am doing, Tychicus, our dear friend and faithful helper in the Master’s cause, will tell you everything.
EPH 6:22 I am sending him to you on purpose that you may learn all about us, and that he may cheer your hearts.
EPH 6:23 May God, the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ give every follower peace, and love linked with faith.
EPH 6:24 May God’s blessing be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an undying love.
PHI 1:1 To all Christ’s people at Philippi, with the supervisors and assistants, from Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus.
PHI 1:2 May God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you, and give you peace.
PHI 1:3 Every recollection that I have of you is a cause of thanksgiving to God,
PHI 1:4 always, in every prayer that I offer for you all – my prayers are full of joy –
PHI 1:5 because of the share that you have had in spreading the good news, from the first day that you received it until now.
PHI 1:6 For of this I am confident, that he who began a good work in you will complete it in readiness for the day of Jesus Christ.
PHI 1:7 And, indeed, I am justified in feeling like this about you all; because you have a warm place in my heart – you who all, both in my imprisonment and in the work of defending and establishing the good news, shared my privilege with me.
PHI 1:8 God will bear me witness how I yearn for you all with the tenderness of Christ Jesus.
PHI 1:9 And what I pray for is this – that your love may grow yet stronger and stronger, with increasing knowledge and all discernment,
PHI 1:10 until you are able to appreciate all moral distinctions. And I pray, too, that you may be kept pure and blameless against the day of Christ,
PHI 1:11 bearing a rich harvest of that righteousness which comes through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God.
PHI 1:12 Friends, I want you to realise that what has happened to me has actually served to forward the good news.
PHI 1:13 It has even become evident, not only to all the imperial guard, but to everyone else, that it is for Christ’s sake that I am in chains.
PHI 1:14 And besides this, most of our fellow followers have gained confidence in the Lord through my chains, and now venture with far greater freedom to speak of God’s message fearlessly.
PHI 1:15 It is true that some do proclaim the Christ out of jealousy and opposition, but there are others who proclaim him from goodwill.
PHI 1:16 The latter do it from love for me, knowing that I have been appointed to plead the cause of the good news.
PHI 1:17 The former spread the news of the Christ in a factious spirit, and not sincerely, thinking to add to the pain of my chains.
PHI 1:18 But what of that? Only that in some way or other, either with assumed or with real earnestness, Christ is being made known; and at that I rejoice.
PHI 1:19 Yes, and I will rejoice, for I know that, through your prayers and through a rich supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, all this will make for my salvation.
PHI 1:20 And this will fulfil my earnest expectation and hope that I will have no cause for shame, but that, with unfailing courage, now as before, Christ will be honoured in my body, whether by my life or by my death,
PHI 1:21 for to me life is Christ, and death is gain.
PHI 1:22 But what if the life here in the body – if this brings me fruit from my labours? Then which to choose I cannot tell! I am sorely perplexed either way!
PHI 1:23 My own desire is to depart and be with Christ, for this would be far better.
PHI 1:24 But, for your sakes, it may be more needful that I should still remain here in the body.
PHI 1:25 Yes, I am confident that this is so, and therefore I am sure that I will stay, and stay near you all, to promote your progress and joy in the faith;
PHI 1:26 so that, when you once more have me among you, you, in your union with Christ Jesus, may find in me fresh cause for exultation.
PHI 1:27 Under all circumstances let your lives be worthy of the good news of the Christ: so that, whether I come and see you, or whether I hear of your affairs at a distance, I may know that you are standing firm, animated by one spirit, and joining with one heart in a common struggle for the faith taught by the good news,
PHI 1:28 without ever shrinking from your opponents. To them this will be a sign of their destruction and of your salvation – a sign from God.
PHI 1:29 For, on behalf of Christ, you have had the privilege granted you, not only of trusting in him, but also of suffering on his behalf.
PHI 1:30 You will be engaged in the same hard struggle as that which you once saw me waging, and which you hear that I am waging still.
PHI 2:1 If, then, any encouragement comes through union with Christ, if there is any persuasive power in love, if there is any communion with the Spirit, if there is any tenderness or pity,
PHI 2:2 I entreat you to make my happiness complete – live together animated by the same spirit and in mutual love, one in heart, animated by one Spirit.
PHI 2:3 Nothing should be done out of selfish ambition or vain conceit. Rather, in humility lift others up above yourselves,
PHI 2:4 considering not only your own interests but also the interests of others.
PHI 2:5 Let the spirit of Christ Jesus be yours also.
PHI 2:6 Though the divine nature was his from the beginning, yet he did not look on equality with God as above all things to be clung to,
PHI 2:7 but impoverished himself by taking the nature of a servant and becoming like one of us;
PHI 2:8 he appeared among us as a man, and still further humbled himself by submitting even to death – to death on a cross!
PHI 2:9 And that is why God raised him to the very highest place, and gave him the name which stands above all other names,
PHI 2:10 so that in adoration of the name of Jesus every knee should bend, in heaven, on earth, and under the earth,
PHI 2:11 and that every tongue should acknowledge JESUS CHRIST as LORD – to the glory of God the Father.
PHI 2:12 Therefore, my dear friends, as you have always been obedient in the past, so now work out your own salvation with anxious care, not only when I am with you, but all the more now that I am absent.
PHI 2:13 Remember it is God who, in his kindness, is at work within you, enabling you both to will and to work.
PHI 2:14 In all that you do, avoid murmuring and dissension,
PHI 2:15 so as to prove yourselves blameless and innocent – faultless children of God, in the midst of an evil-disposed and perverse generation, in which you are seen shining like stars in a dark world,
PHI 2:16 offering to them the message of life; and then I will be able at the day of Christ to boast that I did not run my course for nothing, or toil for nothing.
PHI 2:17 And yet, even if, when your faith is offered as a sacrifice to God, my lifeblood must be poured out in addition, still I will rejoice and share the joy of you all;
PHI 2:18 and you must also rejoice and share my joy.
PHI 2:19 I hope, however, as one who trusts in the Lord Jesus, to send Timothy to you before long, so that I may myself be cheered by receiving news of you.
PHI 2:20 For I have no one but him to send – no one of kindred spirit who would take the same genuine interest in your welfare.
PHI 2:21 They are all pursuing their own aims and not those of Christ Jesus.
PHI 2:22 But you know what Timothy has proved himself to be, and how, like a child working for his father, he worked hard with me in spreading the good news.
PHI 2:23 It is Timothy, then, whom I hope to send, just as soon as I find out what is going to happen to me here.
PHI 2:24 And I am confident, as one who trusts in the Lord Jesus, that before long I myself will follow.
PHI 2:25 Still I think it necessary to send Epaphroditus to you now, for he is my dear friend, fellow worker, and fellow soldier, and he was also your messenger to help me in my need.
PHI 2:26 For he has been longing to see you all, and has been distressed because you heard of his illness.
PHI 2:27 And I can assure you that his illness very nearly proved fatal. But God had pity on him, and not on him only but also on me, so that I might not have sorrow on sorrow.
PHI 2:28 I am all the more ready, therefore, to send him, so that the sight of him may revive your spirits and my own sorrow be lightened.
PHI 2:29 Give him, then, the heartiest of Christian welcomes, and hold such people in great honour.
PHI 2:30 For it was owing to his devotion to the Master’s work that he was at the point of death, having risked his own life in the effort to supply what was wanting in the help that you sent me.
PHI 3:1 In conclusion, my friends, may all joy be yours in your union with the Lord. To repeat what I have already written does not weary me, and is the safe course for you.
PHI 3:2 Beware of those dogs! Beware of those mischievous workers! Beware of the men who mutilate themselves!
PHI 3:3 For it is we who are the circumcised – we whose worship is prompted by the Spirit of God, who exult in Christ Jesus, and who do not rely on external privileges;
PHI 3:4 though I, if anyone, have cause to rely even on them. If anyone thinks he can rely on external privileges, far more can I!
PHI 3:5 I was circumcised when eight days old; I am an Israelite by birth, and of the tribe of Benjamin; I am a Hebrew, and the child of Hebrews. As to the Law, I was a Pharisee;
PHI 3:6 as to zeal, I was a persecutor of the church; as to such righteousness as is due to Law, I proved myself blameless.
PHI 3:7 But all the things which I once held to be gains I have now, for the Christ’s sake, come to count as loss.
PHI 3:8 More than that, I count everything as loss, for the sake of the exceeding value of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. And for his sake I have lost everything, and count it as rubbish, if I may but gain Christ and be found in union with him;
PHI 3:9 any righteousness that I have being, not the righteousness that results from Law, but the righteousness which comes through faith in Christ – the righteousness which is derived from God and is founded on faith.
PHI 3:10 Then indeed I will know Christ, and the power of his resurrection, and all that it means to share his sufferings,
PHI 3:11 in the hope that, if I become like him in death, I may possibly attain to the resurrection from the dead.
PHI 3:12 Not that I have already laid hold of it, or that I am already made perfect. But I press on, in the hope of actually laying hold of that for which indeed I was laid hold of by Christ Jesus.
PHI 3:13 For I, friends, do not regard myself as having yet laid hold of it. But this one thing I do – forgetting what lies behind, and straining every nerve for that which lies in front,
PHI 3:14 I press on to the goal, to gain the prize of that heavenward call which God gave me through Christ Jesus.
PHI 3:15 Let all of us, then, whose faith is mature, think this way. Then, if on any matter you think otherwise, God will make that also plain to you.
PHI 3:16 Only we are bound to order our lives by what we have already attained.
PHI 3:17 My friends, unite in following my example, and fix your eyes on those who are living by the pattern which we have set you.
PHI 3:18 For there are many – of whom I have often told you, and now tell you even with tears – who are living in enmity to the cross of the Christ.
PHI 3:19 The end of such people is ruin; for their appetites are their God, and they glory in their shame; their minds are given up to earthly things.
PHI 3:20 But we are citizens of heaven, and from heaven we expect a saviour to come, the Lord Jesus Christ.
PHI 3:21 By the exercise of his power to bring everything into subjection to himself, he will make our humble bodies like his glorious body.
PHI 4:1 So then, my dear friends, whom I am longing to see – you who are my joy and my crown, stand fast in union with the Lord, dear friends.
PHI 4:2 I entreat Euodia, and I entreat Syntyche, to live in harmony, in union with the Lord;
PHI 4:3 yes, and I ask you, my true comrade, to help them, remembering that they toiled by my side in spreading the good news; and so, too, did Clement and my other fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.
PHI 4:4 All joy be yours at all times in your union with the Lord. Again I repeat – All joy be yours.
PHI 4:5 Let your forbearing spirit be plain to everyone. The Lord is near.
PHI 4:6 Do not be anxious about anything; but under all circumstances, by prayer and entreaty joined with thanksgiving, make your needs known to God.
PHI 4:7 Then the peace of God, which is beyond all human understanding, will stand guard over your hearts and thoughts, through your union with Christ Jesus.
PHI 4:8 In conclusion, friends, whenever you find things that are true or honourable, righteous or pure, loveable or praiseworthy, or if virtue and honour have any meaning, let them fill your thoughts.
PHI 4:9 All that you learned and received and heard and saw in me put into practice continually; and then God, the giver of peace, will be with you.
PHI 4:10 It was a matter of great joy to me, as one in union with the Lord, that at length your interest in me had revived. The interest indeed you had, but not the opportunity.
PHI 4:11 Do not think that I am saying this under the pressure of want. For I, however I am placed, have learned to be independent of circumstances.
PHI 4:12 I know how to face humble circumstances, and I know how to face prosperity. Into all and every human experience I have been initiated – into plenty and hunger, into prosperity and want.
PHI 4:13 I can do everything through the strength of the one who makes me strong!
PHI 4:14 Yet you have acted nobly in sharing my troubles.
PHI 4:15 And you at Philippi know, as well as I, that in the early days of the good news – at the time when I had just left Macedonia – no church, with the one exception of yourselves, had anything to do with me as far as giving and receiving are concerned.
PHI 4:16 Indeed, even while I was still in Thessalonica, you sent more than once to relieve my wants.
PHI 4:17 It is not that I am anxious for your gifts, but I am anxious to see the abundant return that will be placed to your account. I have enough of everything, and to spare.
PHI 4:18 My wants are fully satisfied, now that I have received from Epaphroditus the gifts which you sent me – the sweet fragrance of a sacrifice acceptable and pleasing to God.
PHI 4:19 And my God, out of the greatness of his wealth, will, in glory, fully satisfy your every need, through your union with Christ Jesus.
PHI 4:20 To him, our God and Father, be ascribed all glory for every and ever. Amen.
PHI 4:21 Give my greeting to everyone of the people of Christ Jesus. The Lord’s followers who are with me send your their greetings.
PHI 4:22 All Christ’s people here, and especially those who belong to the Emperor’s household, send theirs.
PHI 4:23 May the blessing of the Lord Jesus Christ rest on your souls.
COL 1:1 From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus, by the will of God, and from Timothy, also a follower of the Lord.
COL 1:2 To Christ’s people at Colossae – the followers who are faithful to him: May God, our Father, bless you and give you peace.
COL 1:3 Whenever we pray we never fail to thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for you,
COL 1:4 now that we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the love that you have for all his people,
COL 1:5 because of the hope which is kept safe for you in heaven. Of this hope you heard long ago in the true message of the good news which reached you,
COL 1:6 bearing fruit and growing, as it does, through all the world, just as it did among you from the very day that you heard of God’s loving kindness, and understood what that loving kindness really is.
COL 1:7 It is just what you learned from Epaphras, our dear fellow servant, who, as a minister of the Christ, faithfully represents us,
COL 1:8 and who told us of the love with which the Spirit has inspired you.
COL 1:9 And therefore we, from the very day that we heard this, have never ceased praying for you, or asking that you may be filled with the knowledge of the will of God, which comes through all true spiritual wisdom and insight.
COL 1:10 Then you will live lives worthy of the Master, and so please God in every way. Your lives will be fruitful in every kind of good action, and grow into a fuller knowledge of God;
COL 1:11 you will be made strong at all points with a strength worthy of the power manifested in his glory – strong to endure with patience, and even with gladness, whatever may happen to you;
COL 1:12 and you will give thanks to the Father who made you fit to share the lot which awaits Christ’s people in the realms of light.
COL 1:13 For God has rescued us from the tyranny of darkness, and has removed us into the kingdom of his Son, who is the embodiment of his love,
COL 1:14 and through whom we have found deliverance in the forgiveness of our sins.
COL 1:15 For Christ is the incarnation of the invisible God – firstborn and head of all creation;
COL 1:16 for in him was created all that is in heaven and on earth, the visible and the invisible – angels and archangels and all the powers of heaven.
COL 1:17 All has been created through him and for him. He was before all things, and all things unite in him;
COL 1:18 and he is the head of the church, which is his body. The firstborn from the dead, he is to the church the source of its life, that he, in all things, may stand first.
COL 1:19 For it pleased the Father that in him the divine nature in all its fulness should live,
COL 1:20 and through him to reconcile all things to himself (making peace by the shedding of Christ’s blood offered on the cross) – whether on earth or in heaven.
COL 1:21 And it pleased God that you, once estranged from him and hostile towards him in your thoughts, intent only on wickedness –
COL 1:22 but now he has reconciled you to himself by the sacrifice of Christ’s earthly body in death – it has pleased God that you should stand in his presence holy, pure, and blameless,
COL 1:23 if only you remain true to your faith, firm and immovable, never abandoning the hope held out in the good news to which you listened, which has been proclaimed among all created things under heaven, and of which I, Paul, was made an assistant.
COL 1:24 Now at last I can rejoice in my sufferings on your behalf, and in my own person I supplement the afflictions endured by the Christ, for the sake of his body, the church;
COL 1:25 of which I myself became a minister in virtue of the office with which God entrusted me for your benefit, to declare the message of God in all its fulness –
COL 1:26 that truth which has been hidden from former ages and generations. But now it has been revealed to God’s people,
COL 1:27 to whom it was his pleasure to make known the surpassing glory of that hidden truth when proclaimed among the Gentiles – “Christ among you! Your hope of glory!”
COL 1:28 This is the Christ whom we proclaim, warning everyone, and instructing everyone, with all the wisdom that we possess, in the hope of bringing everyone into God’s presence perfected by union with Christ.
COL 1:29 It is for that I toil, struggling with all the energy which he inspires and which works powerfully within me.
COL 2:1 I want you to know in how great a struggle I am engaged for you and for Christ’s people at Laodicea, and for all who have not yet seen me;
COL 2:2 in the hope that they, being bound to one another by love, and keeping in view the full blessedness of a firm conviction, may be encouraged to strive for a perfect knowledge of God’s hidden truth,
COL 2:3 even Christ himself, in whom all treasures of wisdom and knowledge lie hidden.
COL 2:4 I say this to prevent anyone from deceiving you by plausible arguments.
COL 2:5 It is true that I am not with you in person, but I am with you in spirit, and am glad to see the good order and the unbroken front resulting from your faith in Christ.
COL 2:6 Since, therefore, you have received Jesus, the Christ, as your Lord, live your lives in union with him –
COL 2:7 rooted in him, building up your characters through union with him, growing stronger through your faith, as you were taught, overflowing with faith and thanksgiving.
COL 2:8 Take care that there is not someone who will carry you away by his “philosophy” – a hollow sham! – following, as it does, mere human traditions, and dealing with puerile questions of this world, and not with Christ.
COL 2:9 For in Christ the Godhead in all its fulness dwells incarnate;
COL 2:10 and, by your union with him, you also are filled with it. He is the head of all archangels and powers of heaven.
COL 2:11 By your union with him you received a circumcision that was not performed by human hands, when you threw off the tyranny of the earthly body, and received the circumcision of the Christ.
COL 2:12 For in baptism you were buried with Christ; and in baptism you were also raised to life with him, through your faith in the omnipotence of God, who raised him from the dead.
COL 2:13 And to you, who once were dead, by reason of your sins and your uncircumcised nature – to you God gave life in giving life to Christ! He pardoned all our sins!
COL 2:14 He canceled the bond which stood against us – the bond that consisted of ordinances – and which was directly hostile to us! He has taken it out of our way by nailing it to the cross!
COL 2:15 He rid himself of all the powers of evil, and held them up to open contempt, when he celebrated his triumph over them on the cross!
COL 2:16 Do not, then, allow anyone to take you to task on questions of eating or drinking, or in the matter of annual or monthly or weekly festivals.
COL 2:17 These things are only the shadow of what is to come; the substance is in the Christ.
COL 2:18 Do not let anyone defraud you of the reality by affecting delight in so-called “humility” and angel-worship. Such a person busies themselves with their visions, and without reason are rendered conceited by their merely human intellect.
COL 2:19 They fail to maintain union with the head, to whom it is due that the whole body, nourished and knit together by the contact and connexion of every part, grows with a divine growth.
COL 2:20 Since, with Christ, you became dead to the puerile teaching of this world, why do you submit, as if you still belonged to the world,
COL 2:21 to such ordinances as “Do not handle, or taste, or touch”?
COL 2:22 For all the things referred to in them cease to exist when used. You are following mere human directions and instructions.
COL 2:23 Such prohibitions appear reasonable where there is a desire for self-imposed service, and so-called “humility,” and harsh treatment of the body, but are of no real value against the indulgence of our earthly nature.
COL 3:1 Since, therefore, you were raised to life with the Christ, seek for the things that are above; for it is there that the Christ is seated at the right hand of God.
COL 3:2 Fix your thoughts on the things that are above, not on those that are on earth.
COL 3:3 For you died, and your life now lies hidden, with the Christ, in God.
COL 3:4 When the Christ, who is our life, appears, then you also will appear with him in glory.
COL 3:5 Therefore destroy all that is earthly in you – immorality, uncleanness, passions, evil desires, and that greed which is idolatry.
COL 3:6 These are the things because of which the wrath of God comes,
COL 3:7 and to which you, like others, once devoted your lives, when you lived for them.
COL 3:8 You, however, must now lay aside all such things – anger, passion, malice, slander, abuse.
COL 3:9 Never lie to one another. Get rid of your old self and its habits,
COL 3:10 and clothe yourselves with that new self, which, as it gains in knowledge, is being constantly renewed in resemblance to him who made it.
COL 3:11 In that new life there is no distinction between Greek and Jew, circumcised and uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave, free; but Christ is all! – and in all!
COL 3:12 Therefore, as God’s people, consecrated and dear to him, clothe yourselves with tenderness of heart, kindliness, humility, gentleness, forbearance;
COL 3:13 bearing with one another, and, when there is any ground for complaint, forgiving one another freely. As the Master freely forgave you, so you must forgive one another.
COL 3:14 Over all these virtues put on love; for that is the belt which makes all complete.
COL 3:15 Let the peace that the Christ gives decide all doubts within your hearts; for you also were called to the enjoyment of peace as members of one body. And show yourselves thankful.
COL 3:16 Let the message of the Christ be alive in your minds in all its wealth, bringing all wisdom with it. Teach and admonish one another with psalms, and hymns, and sacred songs, full of the loving kindness of God, lifting your hearts in song to him.
COL 3:17 And, whatever you say or do, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus; and through him offer thanksgiving to God the father.
COL 3:18 Wives, submit to your husbands, as befits those who belong to the Lord.
COL 3:19 Husbands, love your wives, and never treat them harshly.
COL 3:20 Children, always obey your parents; for that is pleasant to see in those who belong to the Lord.
COL 3:21 Fathers, never irritate your children, otherwise they might become disheartened.
COL 3:22 Slaves, always obey your earthly masters, not only when their eyes are on you, as if you had but to please people alone, but giving them ungrudging service, in your respect for the Master.
COL 3:23 Whatever you do, do it with all your heart, as if working for the Master and not for people,
COL 3:24 since you know that it is from the Master that you will receive the inheritance which will be your reward. You are serving Christ, the Master.
COL 3:25 Those who do wrong will reap the wrong they have done; and there will be no partiality.
COL 4:1 Masters, do what is right and fair by your slaves, for you know that you also have a Master – in heaven.
COL 4:2 Devote yourselves to prayer. Give your whole mind to it, and also offer thanksgiving;
COL 4:3 and at the same time pray for us, so that God may give us an opening for our message, so that we may speak of the truths hidden in the Christ – the truths for which I am in chains!
COL 4:4 Then I will make them known, as I ought to do.
COL 4:5 Show tact in your behaviour to the outside world, making the most of every opportunity.
COL 4:6 Let your conversation always be kindly, but not bland, season it, as it were, with salt; be aware in each case of the answer you should be giving.
COL 4:7 Our dear friend, Tychicus, will tell you all about me. He is a faithful minister, and a fellow servant in the Master’s cause.
COL 4:8 I send him to you expressly that you may learn our circumstances, and that he may give you encouragement.
COL 4:9 With him will be Onesimus, our dear faithful friend, who is one of yourselves. They will tell you all that is going on here.
COL 4:10 My fellow prisoner, Aristarchus, sends you his greeting, and Barnabas’s cousin, Mark, sends his. (You have received directions about him. If he comes to you, make him welcome.)
COL 4:11 Joshua, who is called Justus, also sends his greeting. These are the only converts from Judaism who have worked with me for the kingdom of God; I have found them a great comfort.
COL 4:12 Epaphras, who is one of yourselves, sends you his greeting. He is a servant of Christ Jesus, and is always most earnest in your behalf in his prayers, praying that you may stand firm, with a matured faith and with a sure conviction of all that is in accordance with God’s will.
COL 4:13 I can bear testimony to the deep interest he takes in you, as well as in the followers at Laodicea and at Hierapolis.
COL 4:14 Luke, our dear doctor, sends you his greeting, and Demas sends his.
COL 4:15 Give my greeting to the followers at Laodicea, and to Nymphe, and to the church that meets at her house.
COL 4:16 And when this letter has been read to you, see that it is also read before the church at Laodicea, and that you yourselves read the letter which will be forwarded from there.
COL 4:17 Give this message to Archippus – “Take care to discharge to the best of your ability the office to which you were appointed in the Master’s cause.”
COL 4:18 I, Paul, add this greeting in my own handwriting. Remember these chains of mine. God’s blessing be with you.
1TH 1:1 To the Thessalonian church in union with God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, from Paul, Silas, and Timothy. May God bless you and give you peace.
1TH 1:2 We always mention you in our prayers and thank God for you all;
1TH 1:3 recalling continually before our God and Father the efforts that have resulted from your faith, the toil prompted by your love, and the patient endurance sustained by your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ.
1TH 1:4 Friends, whom God loves, we know that he has chosen you,
1TH 1:5 because the good news that we brought came home to you, not merely as so many words, but with a power and a fulness of conviction due to the Holy Spirit. For you know the life that we lived among you for your good.
1TH 1:6 And you yourselves began to follow, not only our example, but the Master’s also; and, in spite of much suffering, you welcomed the message with a joy inspired by the Holy Spirit,
1TH 1:7 and so became a pattern to all who believed in Christ throughout Macedonia and Greece.
1TH 1:8 For it was from you that the Lord’s message resounded throughout Macedonia and Greece; and, more than that, your faith in God has become known far and wide; so that there is no need for us to say another word.
1TH 1:9 Indeed, in speaking about us, the people themselves tell of the reception you gave us, and how, turning to God from your idols, you became servants of the true and living God,
1TH 1:10 and are now awaiting the return from heaven of his Son whom he raised from the dead – Jesus, our deliverer from the coming wrath.
1TH 2:1 Yes, friends, you yourselves know that your reception of us was not without result.
1TH 2:2 For, although we had experienced suffering and ill treatment, as you know, at Philippi, we had the courage, by the help of our God, to tell you God’s good news in spite of great opposition.
1TH 2:3 Our appeal to you was not based on a delusion, nor was it made from unworthy motives, or with any intention of misleading you.
1TH 2:4 But, having been found worthy by God to be entrusted with the good news, therefore we tell it; with a view to please, not people, but God who proves our hearts.
1TH 2:5 Never at any time, as you know, did we use the language of flattery, or make false professions in order to hide selfish aims. God will bear witness to that.
1TH 2:6 Nor did we seek to win honour from people, whether from you or from others, although, as apostles of Christ, we might have burdened you with our support.
1TH 2:7 But we lived among you with the simplicity of a child; we were like a woman nursing her own children.
1TH 2:8 In our strong affection for you, that seemed to us the best way of sharing with you, not only God’s good news, but our lives as well – so dear had you become to us.
1TH 2:9 You will not have forgotten, friends, our labour and toil. Night and day we used to work at our trades, so as not be a burden to any of you, while we proclaimed to you God’s good news.
1TH 2:10 You will bear witness, and God also, that our relations with you who believed in Christ were pure, and upright, and beyond reproach.
1TH 2:11 Indeed, you know that, like a father with his own children, we used to encourage and comfort every one of you, and solemnly plead with you;
1TH 2:12 so that you should make your daily lives worthy of God who is calling you into the glory of his kingdom.
1TH 2:13 This, too, is a reason why we, on our part, are continually thanking God – because, in receiving the teaching that you had from us, you accepted it, not as the teaching of humans, but as what it really is – the teaching of God, which is even now doing its work within you who believe in Christ.
1TH 2:14 For you, friends, began to follow the example of the churches of God in Judea which are in union with Jesus Christ; you, in your turn, suffering at the hands of your fellow citizens, in the same way as those churches did at the hands of their people –
1TH 2:15 who killed both the Lord Jesus and the prophets, and persecuted us also. They do not try to please God, and they are enemies to all humanity,
1TH 2:16 for they try to prevent us from speaking to the Gentiles with a view to their salvation, and so are always filling up the measure of their iniquity. But the wrath of God has come upon them to the full!
1TH 2:17 As for ourselves, friends, our having been bereaved of you even for a short time – though in body only, and not in spirit – made us all the more eager to see your faces again; and the longing to do so was strong on us.
1TH 2:18 That was why we made up our minds to go and see you – at least I, Paul, did, more than once – but Satan put difficulties in our way.
1TH 2:19 For what hope or joy will be ours, or what crown will we have to boast of, in the presence of our Lord Jesus, at his coming, if it isn’t you?
1TH 2:20 You are our pride and our delight!
1TH 3:1 And so, as we could bear it no longer, we made up our minds to remain behind alone at Athens,
1TH 3:2 and sent Timothy, our dear friend and God’s minister of the good news of the Christ, to strengthen you, and to encourage you in your faith,
1TH 3:3 so that none of you should be shaken by the troubles through which you are passing. You yourselves know that we are destined to meet with such things.
1TH 3:4 For, even while we were with you, we warned you beforehand that we were certain to encounter trouble. And so it proved, as you know.
1TH 3:5 Therefore, since I could no longer endure the uncertainty, I sent to make inquiries about your faith, fearing that the Tempter had tempted you, and that our toil might prove to have been in vain.
1TH 3:6 But, when Timothy recently returned to us from you with good news of your faith and love, and told us how kindly you think of us – always longing, he said, to see us, just as we are longing to see you –
1TH 3:7 on hearing this, we felt encouraged about you, friends, in the midst of all our difficulties and troubles, by your faith.
1TH 3:8 For it is new life to us to know that you are holding fast to the Lord.
1TH 3:9 How can we thank God enough for all the happiness that you are giving us in the sight of our God?
1TH 3:10 Night and day we pray most earnestly that we may see you face to face, and make good any deficiency in your faith.
1TH 3:11 May our God and Father himself, and Jesus, our Lord, make the way plain for us to come to you.
1TH 3:12 And for you, may the Lord fill you to overflowing with love for one another and for everyone, just as we are filled with love for you;
1TH 3:13 and so make your hearts strong, and your lives pure beyond reproach, in the sight of our God and Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus, with all his Holy Ones.
1TH 4:1 Further, friends, we beg and urge you in the name of our Lord Jesus to carry out more fully than ever – as indeed you are already doing – all that you have heard from us as to what your daily life must be, if it is to please God.
1TH 4:2 For you have not forgotten the directions that we gave you on the authority of our Lord Jesus.
1TH 4:3 For this is God’s purpose – that you should be pure; abstaining from all immorality;
1TH 4:4 each of you learning to gain control over your own body, in a way that is holy and honourable,
1TH 4:5 and not for the mere gratification of your passions, like the Gentiles who know nothing of God;
1TH 4:6 none of you overreaching or taking advantage of their fellow follower of the Lord in such matters. The Lord takes vengeance on all who do such things, as we have already warned you and solemnly declared.
1TH 4:7 For God does not call us to an impure life, but demands holiness.
1TH 4:8 Therefore the person who disregards this warning disregards, not people, but God who gives you his Holy Spirit.
1TH 4:9 As to love for each other there is no need to write to you; for you have yourselves been taught by God to love one another;
1TH 4:10 and indeed you do act in this spirit towards all his people throughout Macedonia. Yet, friends, we beg you to do even more.
1TH 4:11 Make it your ambition to live quietly, and to attend to your own business, and to work with your hands, as we directed you;
1TH 4:12 so that your conduct may win respect from those outside the church, and that you may not want for anything.
1TH 4:13 We don’t want you to be ignorant, friends, about those who have passed to their rest. We don’t want you to grieve like other people who have no hope.
1TH 4:14 For, as we believe that Jesus died and rose again, so also we believe that God will bring, with Jesus, those who through him have passed to their rest.
1TH 4:15 This we tell you on the authority of the Lord – that those of us who are still living at the coming of the Lord will not anticipate those who have passed to their rest.
1TH 4:16 For, with a loud summons, with the shout of an archangel, and with the trumpet-call of God, the Lord himself will come down from heaven.
1TH 4:17 Then those who died in union with Christ will rise first; and afterwards we who are still living will be caught up in the clouds, with them, to meet the Lord in the air; and so we will be for ever with the Lord.
1TH 4:18 Therefore, comfort one another with what I have told you.
1TH 5:1 But as to the times and the moments, there is no need, friends, for anyone to write to you.
1TH 5:2 You yourselves know well that the day of the Lord will come just as a thief comes in the night.
1TH 5:3 When people are saying “All is quiet and safe,” it is then that, like birth pains on a pregnant woman, ruin comes suddenly upon them, and there will be no escape!
1TH 5:4 You, however, friends, are not in darkness, that the daylight should take you by surprise as if you were thieves.
1TH 5:5 For you all are children of light and children of the day. We have nothing to do with night, or darkness.
1TH 5:6 Therefore let us not sleep as others do. No, let us be watchful and self-controlled.
1TH 5:7 It is at night that people sleep, and at night that drunkards get drunk.
1TH 5:8 But let us, who belong to the day, control ourselves, and put on faith and love as a breast plate, and the hope of salvation as a helmet.
1TH 5:9 For God destined us, not for wrath, but to win salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us,
1TH 5:10 that, whether we are still watching or have fallen asleep, we may live with him.
1TH 5:11 Therefore encourage one another, and try to build up one another’s characters, as indeed you are doing.
1TH 5:12 We beg you, friends, to value those who toil among you, and are your leaders in the Lord’s service, and give you counsel.
1TH 5:13 Hold them in the very greatest esteem and affection for the sake of their work. Live at peace with one another.
1TH 5:14 We entreat you also, friends – warn the disorderly, comfort the faint-hearted, give a helping hand to the weak, and be patient with everyone.
1TH 5:15 Take care that none of you ever pays back wrong for wrong, but always follow the kindest course with one another and with everyone.
1TH 5:16 Always be joyful;
1TH 5:17 never cease to pray;
1TH 5:18 under all circumstances give thanks to God. For this is his will for you as made known in Christ Jesus.
1TH 5:19 Do not quench the Spirit;
1TH 5:20 do not make light of preaching.
1TH 5:21 Bring everything to the test; cling to what is good;
1TH 5:22 shun every form of evil.
1TH 5:23 May God himself, the giver of peace, make you altogether holy; and may your spirits, souls, and bodies be kept altogether faultless until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
1TH 5:24 He who calls you will not fail you; he will complete his work.
1TH 5:25 Friends, pray for us.
1TH 5:26 Greet all the Lord’s followers with a sacred kiss.
1TH 5:27 I order you in the Lord’s name to have this letter read to all the brethren.
1TH 5:28 May the blessing of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
2TH 1:1 To the Thessalonian church in union with God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, From Paul, Silas, and Timothy.
2TH 1:2 May God, the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace.
2TH 1:3 Friends, it is our duty always to thank God about you, as is but right, considering the wonderful growth of your faith, and because, without exception, your love for one another is continually increasing.
2TH 1:4 So much is this the case that we ourselves speak with pride, before the churches of God, of the patience and faith which you have shown, in spite of all the persecutions and troubles that you are enduring.
2TH 1:5 These persecutions will vindicate the justice of God’s judgment, and will result in your being reckoned worthy of God’s kingdom, for the sake of which you are now suffering;
2TH 1:6 since God deems it just to inflict suffering on those who are now inflicting suffering on you,
2TH 1:7 and to give relief to you who are suffering, as well as to us, at the appearing of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire.
2TH 1:8 Then he will inflict punishment on those who refuse to know God, and on those who turn a deaf ear to the good news of Jesus, our Lord.
2TH 1:9 They will pay the penalty of unutterable ruin – banished from the presence of the Lord and from the glorious manifestation of his might,
2TH 1:10 when he comes to be honoured in his people, and to be revered in all who have learned to believe in him (for you also believed our testimony) – as he will be on that day.
2TH 1:11 With this in view, our constant prayer for you is that our God may count you worthy of the call that you have received, and by his power make perfect your delight in all goodness and the efforts that have resulted from your faith.
2TH 1:12 Then, in the loving kindness of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ, will the name of Jesus, our Lord, be honoured in you, and you in him.
2TH 2:1 As to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our being gathered to meet him, we beg you, friends,
2TH 2:2 not lightly to let your minds become unsettled or disturbed by any revelation, or by any message or letter purporting to come from us, to the effect that the day of the Lord is come.
2TH 2:3 Don’t let anyone deceive you in any way. For it will not come before the final rebellion against God, when lawlessness is revealed in human form, headed for destruction.
2TH 2:4 He is the adversary of everything that is spoken of as a god or as an object of worship, enthroning himself in God”s Temple claiming to be God!
2TH 2:5 Don’t you remember how, when I was with you, I used to speak to you of all this?
2TH 2:6 And you know now what the restraining influence is which prevents his appearing before his appointed time.
2TH 2:7 Wickedness, indeed, is already at work in secret, but only until he who at present restrains it is removed out of the way.
2TH 2:8 Then the lawless person will be revealed, but the Lord Jesus will destroy him with the breath of his mouth, annihilate him by the splendour of his coming.
2TH 2:9 When the lawless person comes, there will be great activity on the part of Satan, in the form of all kinds of deceptive miracles, signs, and marvels, as well as of wicked attempts to delude –
2TH 2:10 to the ruin of those who are on the path to destruction, because they have never received and loved the truth to their own salvation.
2TH 2:11 That is why God places them under the influence of a delusion, to cause them to believe a lie;
2TH 2:12 so that sentence may be passed on all those who refuse to believe the truth, but delight in wickedness.
2TH 2:13 But, friends, whom the Lord loves, it is our duty always to thank God about you, for, from the first, God chose you for salvation through the purifying influence of the Spirit, and your belief in the truth.
2TH 2:14 To this you were called by the good news which we brought you, to attain to the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
2TH 2:15 Stand firm then, friends, and hold fast to the truths that we taught you, whether by word or by letter.
2TH 2:16 And may our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God our Father, who loved us and, in his loving kindness, gave us unfailing consolation and good ground for hope,
2TH 2:17 console your hearts, and strengthen you to do and to say all that is right.
2TH 3:1 In conclusion, friends, pray for us – pray that the Lord’s message may spread rapidly, and be received everywhere with honour, as it was among you;
2TH 3:2 and that we may be preserved from wrong-headed and wicked people – for it is not everyone who believes in Christ.
2TH 3:3 But the Lord will not fail you. He will give you strength, and guard you from evil.
2TH 3:4 Yes, and the confidence that our union with the Lord enables us to place in you leads us to believe that you are doing, and will do, what we direct you.
2TH 3:5 May the Lord bring you to the love of God, and to the patience of the Christ.
2TH 3:6 We beg you, friends, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to avoid any follower who is living an ill-ordered life, which is not in agreement with the teaching that you received from us.
2TH 3:7 For you know well that you ought to follow our example. When we were with you, our life was not ill-ordered,
2TH 3:8 nor did we eat anyone’s bread without paying for it. Night and day, labouring and toiling, we used to work at our trades, so as not to be a burden on any of you.
2TH 3:9 This was not because we had not a right to receive support, but our object was to give you a pattern for you to copy.
2TH 3:10 Indeed, when we were with you, the rule we laid down was – “Whoever does not choose to work will not get to eat.”
2TH 3:11 We hear that there are among you people who are living ill-ordered lives, and who, instead of attending to their own business, are mere busybodies.
2TH 3:12 All such people we beg, and implore, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to attend quietly to their business, and earn their own living.
2TH 3:13 You, friends, must not grow weary of doing what is right.
2TH 3:14 If anyone disregards what we have said in this letter, take note of them and avoid their company, so that they may feel ashamed.
2TH 3:15 Yet do not think of them as an enemy, but caution them as you would a brother or sister.
2TH 3:16 May the Lord, from whom all peace comes, himself give you his peace at all times and in all ways. May he be with you all.
2TH 3:17 I, Paul, add this greeting in my own handwriting. It is my signature to every letter. This is how I write.
2TH 3:18 May the blessing of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
1TI 1:1 From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the appointment of God, our Saviour, and Christ Jesus, our hope.
1TI 1:2 To Timothy, my true child in the faith: May God, the Father, and Christ Jesus, our Lord, bless you, and be merciful to you, and give you peace.
1TI 1:3 I beg you, as I did when I was on my way into Macedonia, to remain at Ephesus; so that you may instruct certain people there not to teach new and strange doctrines,
1TI 1:4 nor to devote their attention to legends and interminable genealogies, which tend to give rise to argument rather than to further that divine plan which is revealed in the faith.
1TI 1:5 The object of all instruction is to call forth that love which comes from a pure heart, a clear conscience, and a sincere faith.
1TI 1:6 And it is because they have not aimed at these things that the attention of certain people has been diverted to unprofitable subjects.
1TI 1:7 They want to be teachers of the Law, and yet do not understand either the words they use, or the subjects on which they speak so confidently.
1TI 1:8 We know, of course, that the Law is excellent, when used legitimately,
1TI 1:9 by one who recognises that laws were not made for good people, but for the lawless and disorderly, for irreligious and wicked people, for those who are irreverent and profane, for those who ill-treat their fathers or mothers, for murderers,
1TI 1:10 for the immoral, for perverts, for slave traders, for liars, for perjurers, and for whatever else is opposed to sound Christian teaching –
1TI 1:11 as is taught in the glorious good news of the ever-blessed God, with which I was entrusted.
1TI 1:12 I am thankful to Christ Jesus, our Lord, who has been my strength, for showing that he thought me worthy of trust by appointing me to his ministry,
1TI 1:13 though I once used to blaspheme, and to persecute, and to insult. Yet mercy was shown me, because I acted in ignorance, while still an unbeliever;
1TI 1:14 and the loving kindness of our Lord was boundless, and filled me with that faith and love which come from union with Christ Jesus.
1TI 1:15 How true the saying is, and worthy of the fullest acceptance, that “Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners”! And there is no greater sinner than I!
1TI 1:16 Yet mercy was shown me for the express purpose that Christ Jesus might exhibit in my case, beyond all others, his exhaustless patience, as an example for those who were afterwards to believe on him and attain eternal life.
1TI 1:17 To the eternal King, ever-living, invisible, the one God, be ascribed honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.
1TI 1:18 This, then, is the charge that I lay on you, Timothy, my child, in accordance with what was predicted of you – Fight the good fight in the spirit of those predictions,
1TI 1:19 with faith, and with a clear conscience; and it is because they have thrust this aside, that, as regards the faith, some have wrecked their lives.
1TI 1:20 Hymenaeus and Alexander are instances – the men whom I delivered over to Satan so that they might be taught not to blaspheme.
1TI 2:1 First of all, then, I ask that petitions, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings should be offered for everyone,
1TI 2:2 especially for kings and all who are in high positions, in order that we may lead a quiet and peaceful life in a deeply religious and reverent spirit.
1TI 2:3 This will be good and acceptable in the eyes of God, our Saviour,
1TI 2:4 whose will is that everyone should be saved, and attain to a full knowledge of the truth.
1TI 2:5 There is but one God, and one mediator between God and humanity – the human, Christ Jesus,
1TI 2:6 who gave himself as a ransom on behalf of all. This must be our testimony, as opportunities present themselves;
1TI 2:7 and it was for this that I was myself appointed a herald and an apostle (I am telling the simple truth and no lie) – a teacher of the Gentiles in the faith and truth.
1TI 2:8 My desire, then, is that it should be the custom everywhere for the men to lead the prayers, with hands reverently uplifted, avoiding heated controversy.
1TI 2:9 I also desire that women should adorn themselves with appropriate dress, worn quietly and modestly, and not with wreaths or gold ornaments for the hair, or pearls, or costly clothing,
1TI 2:10 but – as is proper for women who profess to be religious – with good actions.
1TI 2:11 They must learn, listening quietly to their teachers and showing them all deference.
1TI 2:12 I do not consent to them becoming teachers, or exercising authority over men; they ought to not make a fuss.
1TI 2:13 Adam was formed first, not Eve.
1TI 2:14 And it was not Adam who was deceived; it was the woman who was entirely deceived and fell into sin.
1TI 2:15 But she will be saved by the birth of a child, if they never abandon faith, love, or holiness, and behave with modesty.
1TI 3:1 How true is this saying: “To aspire to be to be a supervisor in the church is to be ambitious for a noble task.”
1TI 3:2 The supervisor should be of blameless character; a faithful partner; living a temperate, discreet, and well-ordered life; hospitable, and a skilful teacher,
1TI 3:3 not addicted to drink or brawling, but of a forbearing and peaceable disposition, and not a lover of money;
1TI 3:4 they should provide for their own household well, and their children should kept under control and be well-behaved.
1TI 3:5 If someone does not know how to provide for their own household, how can they take charge of the church of God?
1TI 3:6 The supervisor should not be a recent convert, or they might become blinded by pride and fall under the same judgement as the devil.
1TI 3:7 They should also be well spoken of by outsiders, so that they may not incur censure and so fall into the devil’s trap.
1TI 3:8 So, too, assistants should be serious and straightforward, not given to taking much drink or to questionable money-making,
1TI 3:9 but people who hold the deep truths of the faith and have a clear conscience.
1TI 3:10 They should be tested first, and only appointed to their office if no objection is raised against them.
1TI 3:11 It should be the same with the women in this office. They should be serious, not gossips, sober, and trustworthy in all respects.
1TI 3:12 Assistants should be faithful partners who manage their children and their households well.
1TI 3:13 Those who have filled that post with honour gain for themselves an honourable position, as well as great confidence through the faith that they place in Christ Jesus.
1TI 3:14 I am writing this to you, though I hope that I will come to see you before long;
1TI 3:15 but in case I should be delayed, I want you to know what your conduct ought to be in the household of God, which is the church of the living God – the pillar and stay of the truth.
1TI 3:16 Yes, and undeniably wonderful are the deep truths of our religion; for – “He was revealed in our nature, pronounced righteous in spirit, seen by angels, proclaimed among the Gentiles, believed on in the world, taken up into glory.”
1TI 4:1 But the Spirit distinctly says that in later times there will be some who will fall away from the faith, and devote their attention to misleading spirits, and to the teaching of demons,
1TI 4:2 who will make use of the hypocrisy of lying teachers. These people’s consciences are seared,
1TI 4:3 and they discourage marriage and enjoin abstinence from certain kinds of food; though God created these foods to be enjoyed thankfully by those who hold the faith and have attained a full knowledge of the truth.
1TI 4:4 Everything created by God is good, and there in nothing that need be rejected – provided only that it is received thankfully;
1TI 4:5 for it is consecrated by God’s blessing and by prayer.
1TI 4:6 Put all this before the followers, and you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, sustained by the precepts of the faith and of that good teaching by which you have guided your life.
1TI 4:7 As for profane legends and old wives’ tales, leave them alone. Train yourself to lead a religious life;
1TI 4:8 for while the training of the body is of service in some respects, religion is of service in all, carrying with it, as it does, a promise of life both here and hereafter.
1TI 4:9 How true that saying is and worthy of the fullest acceptance!
1TI 4:10 With that aim we toil and struggle, for we have set our hopes on the living God, who is the Saviour of all, and especially of those who hold the faith.
1TI 4:11 Remember these things in your teaching.
1TI 4:12 Do not let anyone look down on you because you are young, but, by your conversation, your conduct, your love, your faith, and your purity, be an example to those who hold the faith.
1TI 4:13 Until I come, apply yourself to public reading, preaching, and teaching.
1TI 4:14 Do not neglect the divine gift within you, which was given you, amid many a prediction, when the hands of the church elders were laid on your head.
1TI 4:15 Practice these things, devote yourself to them, so that your progress may be plain to everyone.
1TI 4:16 Look to yourself as well as to your teaching. Persevere in this, for your doing so will mean salvation for yourself as well as for your hearers.
1TI 5:1 Do not reprimand an older man, but plead with him as if he were your father. Treat the young men as brothers,
1TI 5:2 the older women as mothers, and the younger women as sisters – with all purity.
1TI 5:3 Show consideration for widows – I mean those who are really widowed.
1TI 5:4 But, if a widow has children or grandchildren, they should learn to show proper regard for the members of their own family first, and to make some return to their parents; for that is pleasing in God’s sight.
1TI 5:5 As for the woman who is really widowed and left quite alone, her hopes are fixed on God, and she devotes herself to prayers and supplications night and day.
1TI 5:6 But the life of a widow who is devoted to pleasure is a living death.
1TI 5:7 Those are the points you should teach, so that there may be no call for your censure.
1TI 5:8 Anyone who fails to provide for their own relatives, and especially for those under their own roof, has disowned the faith, and is worse than an unbeliever.
1TI 5:9 A widow, when her name is added to the list, should not be less than sixty years old; she should have been a faithful wife,
1TI 5:10 and be well spoken of for her kind actions. She should have brought up children, have shown hospitality to strangers, have washed the feet of her fellow Christians, have relieved those who were in distress, and devoted herself to every kind of good action.
1TI 5:11 But you should exclude the younger widows from the list; for, when they grow restive under the yoke of the Christ, they want to marry,
1TI 5:12 and so they bring condemnation on themselves for having broken their previous promise.
1TI 5:13 And not only that, but they learn to be idle as they go about from house to house. Nor are they merely idle, but they also become gossips and busybodies, and talk of what they ought not.
1TI 5:14 Therefore I advise young widows to marry, bear children, and attend to their homes, and so avoid giving the enemy an opportunity for scandal.
1TI 5:15 There are some who have already left us, to follow Satan.
1TI 5:16 Any Christian woman, who has relatives who are widows, ought to relieve them and not allow them to become a burden to the church, so that the church may relieve those widows who are really widowed.
1TI 5:17 Those church elders who fill their office well should be held deserving of especial consideration, particularly those whose work lies in preaching and teaching.
1TI 5:18 The words of scripture are – “You should not muzzle the ox while it is treading out the grain.” and again – “The worker is worth their wages.”
1TI 5:19 Do not entertain a charge against an church elder, unless it is supported by two or three witnesses;
1TI 5:20 but rebuke offenders publicly, so that others may take warning.
1TI 5:21 I charge you solemnly, before God and Christ Jesus and the chosen angels, to carry out these directions, unswayed by prejudice, never acting with partiality.
1TI 5:22 Never ordain anyone hastily, and take no part in the wrongdoing of others. Keep your life pure.
1TI 5:23 Do not continue to drink water only, but take a little wine because of the weakness of your stomach, and your frequent ailments.
1TI 5:24 There are some people whose sins are conspicuous and lead on to judgment, while there are others whose sins dog their steps.
1TI 5:25 In the same way noble deeds become conspicuous, and those which are otherwise cannot be concealed.
1TI 6:1 All who are in the position of slaves should regard their masters as deserving of the greatest respect, so that the name of God, and our teaching, may not be maligned.
1TI 6:2 Those who have Christian masters should not think less of them because they are also followers of Christ, but on the contrary they should serve them all the better, because those who are to benefit by their good work are dear to them as their fellow Christians.
1TI 6:3 Anyone who teaches otherwise, and refuses their assent to sound instruction – the instruction of our Lord Jesus Christ – and to the teaching of religion,
1TI 6:4 is puffed up with conceit, not really knowing anything, but having a morbid craving for discussions and arguments. Such things only give rise to envy, quarrelling, recriminations, base suspicions,
1TI 6:5 and incessant wrangling on the part of these corrupt-minded people who have lost all hold on the truth, and who think of religion only as a source of gain.
1TI 6:6 Of course religion is a great source of gain – when combined with contentment!
1TI 6:7 For we brought nothing into the world, because we cannot even carry anything out of it.
1TI 6:8 So, with food and shelter, we will be content.
1TI 6:9 Those who want to be rich fall into the net of temptation, and become the prey of many foolish and harmful ambitions, which plunge people into destruction and ruin.
1TI 6:10 Love of money is a source of all kinds of evil; and in their eagerness to be rich some have wandered away from the faith, and have been pierced to the heart by many a regret.
1TI 6:11 But you must, servant of God, avoid all this. Aim at righteousness, piety, faith, love, endurance, gentleness.
1TI 6:12 Run the great race of the faith, and win the eternal life. It was for this that you received the call, and, in the presence of many witnesses, made the great profession of faith.
1TI 6:13 I beg you, as in the sight of God, the source of all life, and of Christ Jesus who before Pontius Pilate made the great profession of faith –
1TI 6:14 I implore you to keep his command free from stain or reproach, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.
1TI 6:15 This will be brought about in his own time by the one ever-blessed Potentate, the king of all kings and Lord of all lords,
1TI 6:16 who alone is possessed of immortality and dwells in unapproachable light, whom no one has ever seen or ever can see – to whom be ascribed honour and power for ever. Amen.
1TI 6:17 Teach those who are wealthy in this life not to pride themselves, or fix their hopes, on so uncertain a thing as wealth, but on God, who gives us a wealth of enjoyment on every side.
1TI 6:18 Teach them to show kindness, to exhibit a wealth of good actions, to be open-handed and generous,
1TI 6:19 storing up for themselves what in the future will prove to be a good foundation, so that they may gain the only true life.
1TI 6:20 Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to you. Avoid the profane prattle and contradictions of what some miscall “theology,”
1TI 6:21 for there are those who, while asserting their proficiency in it, have yet, as regards the faith, gone altogether astray. God bless you all.
2TI 1:1 From Paul who, by the will of God, is an apostle of Christ Jesus, charged to proclaim the life that comes from union with Christ Jesus,
2TI 1:2 to Timothy, my dear child: may God, the Father, and Christ Jesus, our Lord, bless you, and be merciful to you, and give you peace.
2TI 1:3 I am thankful to God, whom I serve, as my ancestors did, with a clear conscience, when I remember you, as I never fail to do, in my prayers – night and day alike,
2TI 1:4 as I think of your tears, longing to see you, that my happiness may be completed,
2TI 1:5 now that I have been reminded of the sincere faith that you have shown. That faith was seen first in your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice, and is now, I am convinced, in you also.
2TI 1:6 And that is my reason for reminding you to stir into flame that gift of God, which is yours through your ordination at my hands.
2TI 1:7 For the Spirit which God gave us was not a spirit of cowardice, but a spirit of power, love, and self-control.
2TI 1:8 Do not, therefore, be ashamed of the testimony which we have to bear to our Lord, or of me imprisoned for his sake; but join with me in suffering for the good news, as far as God enables you.
2TI 1:9 It was God who saved us, and from him we received our solemn call – not as a reward for anything that we had done, but in fulfilment of his own loving purpose. For that love was extended to us, through Christ Jesus, before time began,
2TI 1:10 and has now been made apparent through the appearing of our Saviour, Christ Jesus; who has made an end of death, and has brought life and immortality to light by that good news,
2TI 1:11 of which I was myself appointed a herald, apostle, and teacher.
2TI 1:12 That is why I am undergoing these sufferings; yet I feel no shame, for I know in whom I have put my faith, and am convinced that he is able to guard what I have entrusted to him until that day.
2TI 1:13 Keep before you, as an example of sound teaching, all that you learnt from me as you listened with that faith and love which come from union with Christ Jesus.
2TI 1:14 Guard by the help of the Holy Spirit, who is within us, the glorious trust that has been committed to you.
2TI 1:15 You know, of course, that all our friends in Roman Asia turned their backs on me, including Phygellus and Hermogenes.
2TI 1:16 May the Lord show mercy to the household of Onesiphorus; for he often cheered me and was not ashamed of my chains.
2TI 1:17 On the contrary, when he arrived in Rome, he sought eagerly for me until he found me.
2TI 1:18 The Lord grant that he may find mercy at the hands of the Lord on that day. The many services that he rendered at Ephesus you have the best means of knowing.
2TI 2:1 You must, then, my child, find strength in the help which comes from the union with Christ Jesus;
2TI 2:2 and what you learnt from me, in the presence of many listeners, entrust to reliable people, who will be able in their turn to teach others.
2TI 2:3 Share hardships with me, as a true soldier of Christ Jesus.
2TI 2:4 A soldier on active service, to please his superior officer, always avoids entangling himself in the affairs of ordinary life.
2TI 2:5 No athlete is ever awarded the wreath of victory unless they have kept the rules.
2TI 2:6 The labourer who does the work should be the first to receive a share of the fruits of the earth.
2TI 2:7 Reflect on what I say; the Lord will always help you to understand.
2TI 2:8 Keep before your mind Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, a descendant of David, as told in the good news entrusted to me;
2TI 2:9 in the service of which I am suffering hardships, even to being put in fetters as a criminal. But the message of God is not fettered;
2TI 2:10 and that is why I submit to anything for the sake of God’s people: so that they also may obtain the salvation which comes from union with Christ Jesus, and imperishable glory.
2TI 2:11 How true this saying is – “If we have shared his death, we will also share his life.
2TI 2:12 If we continue to endure, we will also share his throne. If we should ever disown him, he, too, will disown us.
2TI 2:13 If we lose our trust, he is still to be trusted, for he cannot be false to himself!”
2TI 2:14 Remind people of all this; tell them solemnly, as in the sight of God, to avoid controversy, a useless thing and the ruin of those who listen to it.
2TI 2:15 Do your utmost to show yourself true to God, a worker with no reason to be ashamed, accurate in delivering the message of the truth.
2TI 2:16 Avoid profane prattle. Those who indulge in it only get deeper into irreligious ways,
2TI 2:17 and their teaching will spread like a cancer. Hymenaeus and Philetus are instances of this.
2TI 2:18 They have gone completely astray as regards the truth; they say that a resurrection has already taken place, and so upset some people’s faith.
2TI 2:19 Yet God’s firm foundation still stands unmoved, and it bears this inscription – “THE LORD KNOWS THOSE WHO ARE HIS”; and this – “LET ALL THOSE WHO USE THE NAME OF THE LORD TURN AWAY FROM WICKEDNESS.”
2TI 2:20 Now in a large house there are not only things of gold and silver, but also others of wood and earthenware, some for better and some for common use.
2TI 2:21 If, then, a person has escaped from the pollution of such errors as I have mentioned, they will be like a thing kept for better use, set apart, serviceable to its owner, ready for any good purpose.
2TI 2:22 Flee from the passions of youth, but pursue righteousness, faith, love, and peace, in the company of those who, with a pure heart, invoke the Lord.
2TI 2:23 Shun foolish and ignorant discussions, for you know that they only breed quarrels;
2TI 2:24 and a servant of the Lord should never quarrel. They ought, on the contrary, to be courteous to everyone, skilful teachers, and forbearing.
2TI 2:25 They should instruct their opponents in a gentle spirit; for, possibly, God may give those opponents a repentance that will lead to a fuller knowledge of truth,
2TI 2:26 and they may yet come to a sober mind, and escape from the devil’s net, when captured by the Lord’s servant to do the will of God.
2TI 3:1 Be sure of this, that in the last days difficult times will come.
2TI 3:2 People will be selfish, mercenary, boastful, haughty, and blasphemous; disobedient to their parents, ungrateful, impure,
2TI 3:3 incapable of affection, merciless, slanderous, wanting in self-control, brutal, careless of the right,
2TI 3:4 treacherous, reckless, and puffed up with pride; they will love pleasure more than they love God;
2TI 3:5 and while they retain the outward form of religion, they will not allow it to influence them. Turn your back on such people as these.
2TI 3:6 For among them are to be found those who creep into homes and captivate weak women – women who, loaded with sins, and slaves to all kinds of passions,
2TI 3:7 are always learning, and yet never able to attain to a real knowledge of the truth.
2TI 3:8 Just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so do these people, in their turn, oppose the truth. Their minds are corrupted, and, as regards the faith, they are utterly worthless.
2TI 3:9 They will not, however, make further progress; for their wicked folly will be plain to everyone, just as the folly Jannes and Jambres was.
2TI 3:10 But you, Timothy, were a close observer of my teaching, my conduct, my purposes, my faith, my forbearance, my love, and my patient endurance,
2TI 3:11 as well as of my persecutions, and of the sufferings which I met with at Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra. You know what persecutions I underwent; and yet the Lord brought me safe out of all!
2TI 3:12 Yes, and all who aim at living a religious life in union with Christ Jesus will have to suffer persecution;
2TI 3:13 but wicked people and impostors will go from bad to worse, deceiving others and deceived themselves.
2TI 3:14 You, however, must stand by what you learnt and accepted as true. You know who they were from whom you learnt it;
2TI 3:15 and that, from your childhood, you have known the sacred writings, which can give you the wisdom that, through belief in Christ Jesus, leads to salvation.
2TI 3:16 All scripture is God-breathed: helpful for teaching, for refuting error, for giving guidance, and for training others in righteousness;
2TI 3:17 so that God’s people may be capable and equipped for good work of every kind.
2TI 4:1 I solemnly charge you – in the sight of God and of Christ Jesus, who will one day judge the living and the dead – I charge you by his appearing and by his kingdom:
2TI 4:2 Proclaim the message, be ready in season and out of season, convince, rebuke, encourage, never failing to instruct with forbearance.
2TI 4:3 For a time will come when people will not tolerate sound teaching. They will follow their own wishes, and, in their itching for novelty, procure themselves a crowd of teachers.
2TI 4:4 They will turn a deaf ear to the truth, and give their attention to legends instead.
2TI 4:5 But you, Timothy, must always be temperate. Face hardships; do the work of a missionary; discharge all the duties of your office.
2TI 4:6 As for me, my life blood is already being poured out; the time of my departure is close at hand.
2TI 4:7 I have run the great race; I have finished the course; I have kept the faith.
2TI 4:8 And now the crown of righteousness awaits me, which the Lord, the just judge, will give me on that day – and not only to me, but to all who have loved his appearing.
2TI 4:9 Do your utmost to come to me soon,
2TI 4:10 for Demas, in his love for the world, has deserted me. He has gone to Thessalonica, Crescens to Galatia, and Titus to Dalmatia.
2TI 4:11 There is no one but Luke with me. Pick up Mark on your way, and bring him with you, for he is useful to me in my work.
2TI 4:12 I have sent Tychicus to Ephesus.
2TI 4:13 Bring with you, when you come, the cloak which I left at Troas with Carpus, and the books, especially the parchments.
2TI 4:14 Alexander, the coppersmith, showed much ill feeling towards me. The Lord will give him what his actions deserve.
2TI 4:15 You must also be on your guard against him, for he is strongly opposed to our teaching.
2TI 4:16 At my first trial no one stood by me. They all deserted me. May it never be counted against them!
2TI 4:17 But the Lord came to my help and strengthened me, in order that, through me, the proclamation should be made so widely that all the Gentiles should hear it; and I was rescued out of the lion’s mouth.
2TI 4:18 The Lord will rescue me from all evil, and bring me safe into his Heavenly kingdom. All glory to him for ever and ever! Amen.
2TI 4:19 Give my greeting to Prisca and Aquila, and to the household of Onesiphorus.
2TI 4:20 Erastus remained at Corinth, and I left Thophimus ill at Miletus.
2TI 4:21 Do your utmost to come before winter. Eubulus, Pudens, Linus and Claudia send you their greetings, and so do the rest of the Lord’s followers.
2TI 4:22 May the Lord be with your soul. God bless you all.
TIT 1:1 From Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, on behalf of the faith of God’s chosen people, and their knowledge of that truth which makes for godliness
TIT 1:2 – and is based on the hope of eternal life, which God, who never lies, promised before the ages began,
TIT 1:3 and has revealed at his own time in his message, with the preaching of which I was entrusted by the command of God our Saviour.
TIT 1:4 To Titus, my true child in our shared faith: May God, the Father, and Christ Jesus, our Saviour, bless you and give you peace.
TIT 1:5 My reason for leaving you in Crete was that you might put in order what had been left unfinished, and appoint church elders in the various towns, as I myself directed you.
TIT 1:6 They are to be of irreproachable character, faithful to their partners, whose children are believers in Christ and have never been open to the charge of being wild or unruly.
TIT 1:7 For a supervisor, as God’s steward, ought to be of blameless character – not arrogant or quick-tempered, not given to drunkeness, violence or shady money-making.
TIT 1:8 Instead, they should be hospitable, love what is good, self-controlled, upright, people of holy life and disciplined,
TIT 1:9 holding firmly to the trustworthy message as it has been taught – so that they may be able to encourage others by sound teaching, as well as to refute those who contradict it.
TIT 1:10 For there are many undisciplined persons who lead others astray with their nonsense, especially those of the group advocating the necessity of circumcision.
TIT 1:11 They need to be kept quiet as they disrupt whole households by teaching what they ought not to teach, simply to make shameful financial gain.
TIT 1:12 It was a Cretan – one of their own prophets – who said: “Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, and lazy gluttons.” This statement is true.
TIT 1:13 Therefore rebuke them sharply, so that they may be sound in the faith,
TIT 1:14 and may pay no attention to Jewish legends, or to the directions of those who turn their backs on the truth.
TIT 1:15 To those whose minds are pure, all things are ritually pure, but to those whose minds are tainted and unbelieving nothing is pure, as their minds and consciences are alike polluted.
TIT 1:16 They claim to know God, but by their actions they deny him. They are detestable and disobedient and useless for any good work.
TIT 2:1 You however, should speak of such subjects as properly have a place in sound teaching.
TIT 2:2 Teach that the older men should be soberly clear minded, dignified and self-controlled – sound in faith, love, and patient endurance.
TIT 2:3 So, too, that the older women should live reverent lives, not slanderers, not slaves to excessive drinking.
TIT 2:4 They should teach what is good, so as to train the younger women to love their husbands and children,
TIT 2:5 and to be self-controlled, pure-minded, to be watching over their home, to be kind, respecting the authority of their husbands, so that no one will speak badly of God’s message.
TIT 2:6 In the same way with the younger men – encourage them to be self-controlled.
TIT 2:7 In all things, set an example of doing good. In your teaching, show integrity and seriousness –
TIT 2:8 let the instruction that you give be sound and above reproach, so that those who oppose you may be ashamed when they fail to find anything bad to say about us.
TIT 2:9 Tell slaves to respect their owner’s authority in all circumstances, and to try their best to please them.
TIT 2:10 Teach them not to contradict or to pilfer, but to show such praiseworthy fidelity in everything, as to recommend the teaching about God our Saviour by all that they do.
TIT 2:11 For the loving kindness of God has been revealed, bringing salvation for all,
TIT 2:12 leading us to renounce ungodliness and worldly desires, and to live self-controlled, upright, and godly lives here in this present age,
TIT 2:13 while awaiting our blessed hope – the appearing in glory of our great God and Saviour, Christ Jesus.
TIT 2:14 For he gave himself on our behalf, to deliver us from all wickedness, and to purify for himself a people who should be truly his own and eager to do good.
TIT 2:15 Tell them of all this, and encourage and rebuke with all authority. Do not let anyone belittle you.
TIT 3:1 Remind them to respect and obey the rulers and authorities, to be ready for every kind of good work, to slander no one, to avoid quarrelling,
TIT 3:2 to be reasonable, and under all circumstances to show a gentle spirit with all.
TIT 3:3 There was a time when we ourselves were foolish, disobedient, misled, enslaved to all kinds of desires and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hating ourselves and hating one another.
TIT 3:4 But, when the kindness of God our Saviour and his love for humanity appeared, he saved us,
TIT 3:5 not as the result of any righteous actions that we had done, but due to his mercy. He saved us though the washing of rebirth and renewal by the power of the Holy Spirit,
TIT 3:6 which he poured out on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour –
TIT 3:7 so that, having been put right with God through his grace, we become heirs to the hope of eternal life.
TIT 3:8 This saying is trustworthy! And it is on these subjects that I want you to lay special emphasis, so that those who have learned to trust in God may be careful to devote themselves to doing good. Such subjects are excellent in themselves, and of benefit to all.
TIT 3:9 But have nothing to do with foolish controversies, or with genealogies, or with quarrels, or fights about the Law. They are useless and futile.
TIT 3:10 If someone is causing divisions among you then, after giving them a second warning, excuse yourself from them.
TIT 3:11 You can be sure that such a person has forsaken the truth and is in the wrong. They stand self-condemned.
TIT 3:12 As soon as I send Artemas or Tychicus to you, join me as quickly as possible at Nicopolis, for I have arranged to spend the winter there.
TIT 3:13 Do your best to help Zenas, the teacher of the Law, and Apollos, on their way, and see that they want for nothing.
TIT 3:14 Let all our people learn to devote themselves to doing good, so as to meet the most pressing needs, and that their lives may not be unfruitful.
TIT 3:15 All who are with me here send you their greeting. Give my greeting to our friends in the faith. God bless you all.
PHM 1:1 From Paul, now a prisoner for Christ Jesus, and from Timothy, a fellow follower of the Lord.
PHM 1:2 To our dear friend and fellow worker Philemon, to our sister Apphia, to our fellow soldier Archippus; and to the church that meets at Philemon’s house;
PHM 1:3 may God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace.
PHM 1:4 I always mention you in my prayers and thank God for you,
PHM 1:5 because I hear of the love and the faith which you show, not only to the Lord Jesus, but also to all his people;
PHM 1:6 and I pray that your participation in the faith may result in action, as you come to a fuller realisation of everything that is good and Christlike in us.
PHM 1:7 I have indeed found great joy and encouragement in your love, knowing, as I do, how the hearts of Christ’s people have been cheered, friend, by you.
PHM 1:8 And so, though my union with Christ enables me, with all confidence, to dictate the course that you should adopt,
PHM 1:9 yet the claims of love make me prefer to plead with you – yes, even me, Paul, though I am an ambassador for Christ Jesus and, now a prisoner for him as well.
PHM 1:10 I plead with you for this child of mine, Onesimus, to whom, in my prison, I have become a father.
PHM 1:11 Once he was of little service to you, but now he has become of great service, not only to you, but to me as well;
PHM 1:12 and I am sending him back to you with this letter – though it is like tearing out of my heart.
PHM 1:13 For my own sake I should like to keep him with me, so that, while I am in prison for the good news, he might attend to my wants on your behalf.
PHM 1:14 But I do not wish to do anything without your consent, because I want your generosity to be voluntary and not, as it were, compulsory.
PHM 1:15 It may be that he was separated from you for an hour, for this reason, so that you might have him back for ever,
PHM 1:16 no longer as a slave, but as something better – a dearly loved friend and follower of the Lord, especially dear to me, and how much more so to you, not only as a person, but as your fellow Christian!
PHM 1:17 If, then, you count me your friend, receive him as you would me.
PHM 1:18 If he has caused you any loss, or owes you anything, charge it to me.
PHM 1:19 I, Paul, put my own hand to it – I will repay you myself. I say nothing about your owing me your self.
PHM 1:20 Yes, friend, let me gain something from you because of your union with the Lord. Cheer my heart by your Christlike spirit.
PHM 1:21 Even as I write, I have such confidence in your compliance with my wishes, that I am sure that you will do even more than I am asking.
PHM 1:22 Please also get a lodging ready for me, for I hope that I will be given back to you all in answer to your prayers.
PHM 1:23 Epaphras, who is my fellow prisoner for Christ Jesus, sends you his greeting;
PHM 1:24 and Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow workers, send theirs.
PHM 1:25 May the blessing of the Lord Jesus Christ rest on your souls.
HEB 1:1 God, who, of old, at many times and in many ways, spoke to our ancestors, by the prophets,
HEB 1:2 has in these latter days spoken to us by the Son, whom he appointed the heir of all things, and through whom he made the universe.
HEB 1:3 For he is the radiance of the glory of God and the expression of his being, upholding all creation by the power of his word; and, when he had made an expiation for the sins of humanity, he took his seat at the right hand of God’s Majesty on high,
HEB 1:4 having shown himself as much greater than the angels as the name that he has inherited surpasses theirs.
HEB 1:5 For to which of the angels did God ever say – “You are my Son; this day I have become your Father”? or again – “I will be to him a Father, and he will be to me a Son”?
HEB 1:6 And again, when God brought the firstborn into the world, he said – “Let all the angels of God bow down before him.”
HEB 1:7 Speaking of the angels, he said – “He makes the winds his angels and the flames of fire his servants”;
HEB 1:8 while of the Son he said – “God is your throne for ever and ever; the sceptre of his kingdom is the sceptre of Justice;
HEB 1:9 You love righteousness and hates iniquity; therefore God, your God, has anointed you with the festal oil more abundantly than your peers.”
HEB 1:10 Again – “You, Lord, in the beginning did lay the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the work of your hands.
HEB 1:11 They will perish, but you remain; as a garment they will all grow old;
HEB 1:12 As a mantle you will fold them up, and as a garment they will be changed, but you are the same, and your years will know no end.”
HEB 1:13 To which of the angels has God ever said – “Sit you at my right hand until I put your enemies as a stool for your feet”?
HEB 1:14 Are not all the angels spirits in the service of God, sent out to minister for the sake of those who are destined to obtain salvation?
HEB 2:1 Therefore we must give still more heed to what we were taught, so we do not drift away.
HEB 2:2 For, if the message which was delivered by angels had its authority confirmed, so that every offence against it, or neglect of it, met with a fitting requital,
HEB 2:3 how can we, of all people, expect to escape, if we disregard so great a salvation? It was the Master who at the outset spoke of this salvation, and its authority was confirmed for us by those who heard him,
HEB 2:4 while God himself added his testimony to it by signs, and marvels, and many different miracles, as well as by imparting the Holy Spirit as he saw fit.
HEB 2:5 God has not given to angels the control of that future world of which we are speaking!
HEB 2:6 No; a writer has declared somewhere – “What are mere mortals that you should remember them? Or human beings that you should care for them?
HEB 2:7 You have made them, for a while, lower than angels; with glory and honour you have crowned them; you have set them over all that your hands have made;
HEB 2:8 you have placed all things beneath their feet.” This “placing of everything” under humanity means that there was nothing which was not placed under them. As yet, however, we do not see everything placed under humanity.
HEB 2:9 What our eyes do see is Jesus, who was made for a while lower than angels, now, because of his sufferings and death, crowned with glory and honour; so that his tasting the bitterness of death should, in God’s loving kindness, be on behalf of all humanity.
HEB 2:10 It was, indeed, fitting that God, for whom and through whom all things exist, should, when leading many children to glory, make the author of their salvation perfect through suffering.
HEB 2:11 For he who purifies, and those whom he purifies, all spring from One; and therefore he is not ashamed to call them his brothers and sisters.
HEB 2:12 He says – “I will tell of your name to my brothers and sisters, in the midst of the congregation I will sing your praise.”
HEB 2:13 And again – “As for me, I will put my trust in God.” And yet again – “See, here am I and the children whom God gave me.”
HEB 2:14 Therefore, since human nature is the common heritage of the children, Jesus also shared it, in order that by death he might render powerless him whose power lies in death – that is, the devil –
HEB 2:15 and so might deliver all those who, from fear of death, had all their lives been living in slavery.
HEB 2:16 It was not, surely, to the help of the angels that Jesus came, but to the help of the descendants of Abraham.
HEB 2:17 And consequently it was necessary that he should in all points be made like his brothers and sisters, in order that he might prove a merciful as well as a faithful high priest in humanity’s relations with God, for the purpose of expiating the sins of his people.
HEB 2:18 The fact that he himself suffered under temptation enables him to help those who are tempted.
HEB 3:1 Therefore, my Christian friends, you who, all alike, have received the call from heaven, fix your attention on Jesus, the apostle and high priest of our religion.
HEB 3:2 See how faithful he was to the God who appointed him, as Moses was in the whole house of God.
HEB 3:3 He has been deemed worthy of far higher honour than Moses, just as the founder of the house is held in greater regard than the house itself.
HEB 3:4 For every house has its founder, and the founder of the universe is God.
HEB 3:5 While the faithful service of Moses in the whole house of God was that of a servant, whose duty was to bear testimony to a message still to come,
HEB 3:6 the faithfulness of Christ was that of a son set over the house of God. And we are his house – if only we retain, unshaken to the end, the courage and confidence inspired by our hope.
HEB 3:7 Therefore, as the Holy Spirit says – “If today you hear God’s voice,
HEB 3:8 harden not your hearts, as when Israel provoked me on the day when they tried my patience in the desert,
HEB 3:9 Where your ancestors tried my forbearance, and saw my mighty deeds for forty years.
HEB 3:10 Therefore I was sorely vexed with that generation, and I said – ‘Their hearts are always straying; they have never learned my ways’;
HEB 3:11 While in my wrath I swore – ‘They will never enter upon my rest.’”
HEB 3:12 Be careful, friends, that there is never found in anyone of you a wicked and faithless heart, shown by that person separating themselves from the living God.
HEB 3:13 Rather encourage one another daily – while there is a today – to prevent anyone among you from being hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.
HEB 3:14 For we now all share in the Christ, if indeed we retain, unshaken to the end, the confidence that we had at the first.
HEB 3:15 To use the words of scripture – “If today you hear God’s voice, harden not your hearts, as when Israel provoked me.”
HEB 3:16 Who were they who heard God speak and yet provoked him? Were not they all those who left Egypt under the leadership of Moses?
HEB 3:17 And with whom was it that God was sorely vexed for forty years? Was not it with those who had sinned, and who fell dead in the desert?
HEB 3:18 And who were they to whom God swore that they should not enter upon his rest, if not those who had proved faithless?
HEB 3:19 We see, then, that they failed to enter upon it because of their want of faith.
HEB 4:1 We must, therefore, be very careful, though there is a promise still standing that we will enter upon God’s rest, that none of you even appear to have missed it.
HEB 4:2 For we have had the good news told us just as they had. But the message which they heard did them no good, since they did not share the faith of those who were attentive to it.
HEB 4:3 Upon that rest we who have believed are now entering. As God has said – “In my wrath I swore – ‘They will never enter upon my rest;’” Although God’s work was finished at the creation of the world;
HEB 4:4 for, in a passage referring to the seventh day, you will find these words – “God rested on the seventh day after all his work.”
HEB 4:5 On the other hand, we read in that passage – “They will never enter upon my rest.”
HEB 4:6 Since, then, there is still a promise that some will enter upon this rest, and since those who were first told the good news did not enter upon it, because of their disbelief,
HEB 4:7 again God fixed a day. “Today,” he said, speaking after a long interval through the mouth of David, in the passage already quoted – “If today you hear God’s voice harden not your hearts.”
HEB 4:8 Now if Joshua had given “rest” to the people, God would not have spoken of another and later day.
HEB 4:9 There is, then, a Sabbath rest still awaiting God’s people.
HEB 4:10 For the person who enters upon God’s rest do themselves rest after their work, just as God did.
HEB 4:11 Let us, therefore, make every effort to enter upon that rest, so that none of us fall through such disbelief as that of which we have had an example.
HEB 4:12 God’s message is a living and active power, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing its way until it penetrates soul and spirit – not the joints only but the marrow – and detecting the inmost thoughts and purposes of the mind.
HEB 4:13 There is no created thing that can hide itself from the sight of God. Everything is exposed and laid bare before the eyes of him to whom we have to give account.
HEB 4:14 We have, then, in Jesus, the Son of God, a great high priest who has passed into the highest heaven; let us, therefore, hold fast to the faith which we have professed.
HEB 4:15 Our high priest is not one unable to sympathise with our weaknesses, but one who has in every way been tempted, exactly as we have been, but without sinning.
HEB 4:16 Therefore, let us draw near boldly to the throne of love, to find pity and love for the hour of need.
HEB 5:1 Every high priest, taken from among the people, is appointed as their representative in their relations with God, to offer both gifts and sacrifices in expiation of sins.
HEB 5:2 And he is able to sympathise with the ignorant and deluded, since he is himself subject to weakness,
HEB 5:3 and is therefore bound to offer sacrifices for sins, not only for the people, but equally so for himself.
HEB 5:4 Nor does anyone take that high office on themselves, until they have been called to do so by God, as Aaron was.
HEB 5:5 In the same way, even the Christ did not take the honour of the high priesthood on himself, but he was appointed by him who said to him – “You are my Son; this day I have become your Father”;
HEB 5:6 and on another occasion also – “You are a priest for all time of the order of Melchizedek.”
HEB 5:7 Jesus, in the days of his earthly life, offered prayers and supplications, with earnest cries and with tears, to him who was able to save him from death; and he was heard because of his devout submission.
HEB 5:8 Son though he was, he learned obedience from his sufferings;
HEB 5:9 and, being made perfect, he became to all those who obey him the source of eternal salvation,
HEB 5:10 while God himself pronounced him a high priest of the order of Melchizedek.
HEB 5:11 Now on this subject I have much to say, but it is difficult to explain it to you, because you have shown yourselves so slow to learn.
HEB 5:12 For whereas, considering the time that has elapsed, you ought to be teaching others, you still need someone to teach you the alphabet of the divine revelation, and need again to be fed with milk instead of with “solid food.”
HEB 5:13 For everyone who still has to take milk knows nothing of the teaching of righteousness; they are a mere infant.
HEB 5:14 But solid food is for Christians of mature faith – those whose faculties have been trained by practice to distinguish right from wrong.
HEB 6:1 Therefore, let us leave behind the elementary teaching about the Christ and press on to perfection, not always laying over again a foundation of repentance for a lifeless formality, of faith in God –
HEB 6:2 teaching concerning baptisms and the laying on of hands, the resurrection of the dead and a final judgment.
HEB 6:3 Yes and, with God’s help, we will.
HEB 6:4 For if those who were once for all brought into the light, and learned to appreciate the gift from heaven, and came to share in the Holy Spirit,
HEB 6:5 and learned to appreciate the beauty of the divine message, and the new powers of the coming age –
HEB 6:6 if those, I say, fell away, it would be impossible to bring them again to repentance; they would be crucifying the Son of God over again for themselves, and exposing him to open contempt.
HEB 6:7 Ground that drinks in the showers that from time to time fall on it, and produces vegetation useful to those for whom it is tilled, receives a blessing from God;
HEB 6:8 but, if it bears thorns and thistles, it is regarded as worthless, it is in danger of being cursed, and its end will be the fire.
HEB 6:9 But about you, dear friends, even though we speak in this way, we are confident of better things – of things that point to your salvation.
HEB 6:10 For God is not unjust; he will not forget the work that you did, and the love that you showed for his name, in sending help to your fellow Christians – as you are still doing.
HEB 6:11 But our great desire is that every one of you should be equally earnest to attain to a full conviction that our hope will be fulfilled, and that you should keep that hope to the end.
HEB 6:12 Then you will not show yourselves slow to learn, but you will copy those who, through faith and patience, are now entering upon the enjoyment of God’s promises.
HEB 6:13 When God gave his promise to Abraham, since there was no one greater by whom he could swear, he swore by himself.
HEB 6:14 His words were – “I will assuredly bless you and increase your numbers.”
HEB 6:15 And so, after patiently waiting, Abraham obtained the fulfilment of God’s promise.
HEB 6:16 People, of course, swear by what is greater than themselves, and with them an oath is accepted as putting a matter beyond all dispute.
HEB 6:17 And therefore God, in his desire to show, with unmistakable plainness, to those who were to enter on the enjoyment of what he had promised, the unchangeableness of his purpose, bound himself with an oath.
HEB 6:18 For he intended us to find great encouragement in these two unchangeable things, which make it impossible for God to prove false – we, I mean, who fled for safety where we might lay hold on the hope set before us.
HEB 6:19 This hope is an anchor for our souls, secure and strong, and it reaches into the sanctuary that lies behind the curtain,
HEB 6:20 where Jesus, our forerunner, has entered on our behalf, after being made for all time a high priest of the order of Melchizedek.
HEB 7:1 It was this Melchizedek, king of Salem and priest of the Most High God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and gave him his blessing;
HEB 7:2 and it was to him that Abraham allotted a tithe of all the spoil. The meaning of his name is “king of righteousness,” and besides that, he was also king of Salem, which means “king of peace.”
HEB 7:3 There is no record of his father, or mother, or lineage, nor again of any beginning of his days, or end of his life. In this he resembles the Son of God, and stands before us as a priest whose priesthood is continuous.
HEB 7:4 Consider, then the importance of this Melchizedek, to whom even the patriarch Abraham himself gave a tithe of the choicest spoils.
HEB 7:5 Those descendants of Levi, who are from time to time appointed to the priesthood, are directed to collect tithes from the people in accordance with the Law – that is from their own kindred, although they also are descended from Abraham.
HEB 7:6 But Melchizedek, although not of this lineage, received tithes from Abraham, and gave his blessing to the man who had God’s promises.
HEB 7:7 Now no one can dispute that it is the superior who blesses the inferior.
HEB 7:8 In the one case the tithes are received by people who are mortal; in the other case by one about whom there is the statement that his life still continues.
HEB 7:9 Moreover, in a sense, even Levi, who is the receiver of the tithes, has, through Abraham, paid tithes;
HEB 7:10 for Levi was still in the body of his ancestor when Melchizedek met Abraham.
HEB 7:11 If, then, perfection had been attainable through the Levitical priesthood – and it was under this priesthood that the people received the Law – why was it still necessary that a priest of a different order should appear, a priest of the order of Melchizedek and not of the order of Aaron?
HEB 7:12 With the change of the priesthood a change of the Law became a necessity.
HEB 7:13 And he of whom all this is said belonged to quite a different tribe, no member of which has ever served at the altar.
HEB 7:14 For it is plain that our Lord had sprung from the tribe of Judah, though of that tribe Moses said nothing about their being priests.
HEB 7:15 All this becomes even yet plainer when we remember that a new priest has appeared, resembling Melchizedek,
HEB 7:16 and that he was appointed, not under a Law regulating only earthly matters, but by virtue of a life beyond the reach of death;
HEB 7:17 for that is the meaning of the declaration – “You are for all time a priest of the order of Melchizedek.”
HEB 7:18 On the one hand, we have the abolition of a previous regulation as being both inefficient and useless
HEB 7:19 (for the Law never brought anything to perfection); and, on the other hand, we have the introduction of a better hope, which enables us to draw near to God.
HEB 7:20 Then again, the appointment of this new priest was ratified by an oath, which is not so with the Levitical priests,
HEB 7:21 but his appointment was ratified by an oath, when God said to him – “The Lord has sworn, and will not change, ‘You are a priest for all time.’”
HEB 7:22 And the oath shows the corresponding superiority of the covenant of which Jesus is appointed the surety.
HEB 7:23 Again, new Levitical priests are continually being appointed, because death prevents their remaining in office;
HEB 7:24 but Jesus remains for all time, and therefore the priesthood that he holds will never pass to another.
HEB 7:25 And that is why he is able to save perfectly those who come to God through him, living for ever, as he does, to intercede of their behalf.
HEB 7:26 This was the high priest that we needed – holy, innocent, spotless, withdrawn from sinners, exalted above the highest heaven,
HEB 7:27 one who has no need to offer sacrifices daily as those high priests have, first for their own sins, and then for those of the people. For this he did once and for all, when he offered himself as the sacrifice.
HEB 7:28 The Law appoints as high priests men who are weak, but the words of God’s oath, which was later than the Law, name the Son as, for all time, the perfect priest.
HEB 8:1 To sum up what I have been saying: Such is the high priest that we have, one who has taken his seat at the right hand of the throne of God’s Majesty in heaven,
HEB 8:2 where he serves in the sanctuary, in that true tent set up by the Lord and not by man.
HEB 8:3 Every high priest is appointed for the purpose of offering gifts and sacrifices to God; it follows, therefore, that this high priest must have some offering to make.
HEB 8:4 If he were, however, still on earth, he would not even be a priest, since there are already priests who offer the gifts as the Law directs.
HEB 8:5 (These priests, it is true, are engaged in a service which is only a copy and shadow of the heavenly realities, as is shown by the directions given to Moses when he was about to construct the tent. “Look to it,” are the words, “that you make every part in accordance with the pattern shown you on the mountain.”)
HEB 8:6 But Jesus, as we see, has obtained a ministry as far excelling theirs, as the covenant of which he is the intermediary, based, as it is, on better promises, excels the former covenant.
HEB 8:7 If that first covenant had been faultless, there would have been no occasion for a second.
HEB 8:8 But, finding fault with the people, God says – “‘A time is coming,’ says the Lord, ‘When I will ratify a new covenant with the people of Israel and with the people of Judah –
HEB 8:9 Not such a covenant as I made with their ancestors on the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt. For they did not abide by their covenant with me, and therefore I disregarded them,’ says the Lord.
HEB 8:10 ‘This is the covenant that I will make with the people of Israel after those days,’ says the Lord. ‘I will impress my laws on their minds, and will inscribe them on their hearts; and I will be their God, and they will be my people.
HEB 8:11 There will be no need for anyone to instruct their fellow citizen, or for a person to say to their relatives “Learn to know the Lord”; for everyone will know me, from the lowest to the highest.
HEB 8:12 For I will be merciful to their wrongdoings, and I will no longer remember their sins.’”
HEB 8:13 By speaking of a new covenant, God at once renders the former covenant obsolete; and whatever becomes obsolete and loses its force is virtually annulled.
HEB 9:1 It is true that even the first covenant had its regulations for divine worship, and its sanctuary – though only a material one.
HEB 9:2 For a tent was constructed, with an outer part which contained the stand for the lamps, and the table, and the consecrated bread. This is called the sanctuary.
HEB 9:3 The part of the tent behind the second curtain is called the inner sanctuary.
HEB 9:4 In it is the gold incense-altar, and the ark containing the covenant, completely covered with gold. In the ark is a gold casket containing the manna, Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tablets on which the covenant was written;
HEB 9:5 while above it, and overshadowing the cover on which atonement was made, are the cherubim of the presence. Now is not the time to discuss these things in detail.
HEB 9:6 Such, then, was the arrangement of the tent. Into the outer part priests are constantly going, in the discharge of their sacred duties;
HEB 9:7 but into the inner only the high priest goes, and that but once a year, and never without taking the blood of a victim, which he offers on his own behalf, and on behalf of the errors of the people.
HEB 9:8 By this the Holy Spirit is teaching that the way into the sanctuary was hidden, as long as the outer part of the tent still remained.
HEB 9:9 For that was only a type, to continue down to the present time; and, in keeping with it, both gifts and sacrifices are offered, though incapable of satisfying the conscience of the worshiper;
HEB 9:10 the whole system being concerned only with food and drink and various ablutions – external ceremonials imposed until the coming of the new order.
HEB 9:11 But, when Christ came, he appeared as high priest of that better system which was established; and he entered through that nobler and more perfect tent, not made by human hands – that is to say, not a part of this present creation.
HEB 9:12 Nor was it with the blood of goats and calves, but with his own blood, that he entered, once and for all, into the sanctuary, and obtained our eternal deliverance.
HEB 9:13 For, if the blood of goats and bulls, and the sprinkling of the ashes of a heifer, purify those who have been defiled (as far as ceremonial purification goes),
HEB 9:14 how much more will the blood of the Christ, who, through his eternal Spirit, offered himself up to God, as a victim without blemish, purify our consciences from a lifeless formality, and fit us for the service of the living God!
HEB 9:15 And that is why he is the intermediary of a new covenant; in order that, as a death has taken place to effect a deliverance from the offences committed under the first covenant, those who have received the call may obtain the eternal inheritance promised to them.
HEB 9:16 Whenever such a covenant as a will is in question, the death of the testator must of necessity be alleged.
HEB 9:17 For such a covenant takes effect only on death, it does not come into force as long as the testator is alive.
HEB 9:18 This explains why even the first covenant was not ratified without the shedding of blood.
HEB 9:19 For, when every command had been announced to all the people by Moses in accordance with the Law, he took the blood of the calves and of the goats, with water, scarlet wool, and a bunch of hyssop, and sprinkled even the book of the Law, as well as all the people,
HEB 9:20 saying, as he did so – ‘This is the blood that renders valid the covenant which God has commanded to be made with you.’
HEB 9:21 And in the same way he also sprinkled with the blood the tent and all the things that were used in public worship.
HEB 9:22 Indeed, under the Law, almost everything is purified with blood; and, unless blood is shed, no forgiveness is to be obtained.
HEB 9:23 While, then, it was necessary for the copies of the heavenly realities to be purified by such means as these, the heavenly realities themselves required better sacrifices.
HEB 9:24 For it was not into a sanctuary made by human hands, which merely foreshadowed the true one, that Christ entered, but into heaven itself, so that he might now appear in the presence of God on our behalf.
HEB 9:25 Nor yet was it to offer himself may times, as year after year the high priest entered the sanctuary with an offering of blood – but not his own blood;
HEB 9:26 for then Christ would have had to undergo death many times since the creation of the world. But now, once and for all, at the close of the age, he has appeared, in order to abolish sin by the sacrifice of himself.
HEB 9:27 And, as it is ordained for people to die but once (death being followed by judgment),
HEB 9:28 so it is with the Christ. He was offered up once and for all, to bear away the sins of many; and the second time he will appear – but without any burden of sin – to those who are waiting for him, to bring salvation.
HEB 10:1 The Law, though able to foreshadow the better system which was coming, never had its actual substance. Its priests, with those sacrifices which they offer continuously year after year, can never make those who come to worship perfect.
HEB 10:2 Otherwise, would not the offering of these sacrifices have been abandoned, as the worshipers, having been once purified, would have had their consciences clear from sins?
HEB 10:3 But, on the contrary, these sacrifices recall their sins to mind year after year.
HEB 10:4 For the blood of bulls and goats is powerless to remove sins.
HEB 10:5 That is why, when he was coming into the world, the Christ declared – “Sacrifice and offering you do not desire, but you provide for me a body;
HEB 10:6 You take no pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin.
HEB 10:7 So I said, ‘See, I have come’ (as is written of me in the pages of the book), ‘To do your will, God.’”
HEB 10:8 First come the words – “You do not desire, nor do you take pleasure in, sacrifices, offerings, burnt offerings, and sacrifices for sin” (offerings regularly made under the Law),
HEB 10:9 and then there is added – “See, I have come to do your will.” The former sacrifices are set aside to be replaced by the latter.
HEB 10:10 And it is in the fulfilment of the will of God that we have been purified by the sacrifice, once and for all, of the body of Jesus Christ.
HEB 10:11 Every other priest stands day after day at his ministrations, and offers the same sacrifices over and over again – sacrifices that can never take sins away.
HEB 10:12 But, this priest, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, which should serve for all time, “took his seat at the right hand of God,”
HEB 10:13 and has since then been waiting “for his enemies to be put as a stool for his feet.”
HEB 10:14 By a single offering he has made perfect for all time those who are being purified.
HEB 10:15 We have also the testimony of the Holy Spirit. For, after saying –
HEB 10:16 “‘This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days,’ says the Lord; ‘I will impress my laws on their hearts, and will inscribe them on their minds,’”
HEB 10:17 then we have – “And their sins and their iniquities I will no longer remember.”
HEB 10:18 And, when these are forgiven, there is no further need of an offering for sin.
HEB 10:19 Therefore, friends, since we may enter the sanctuary with confidence, in virtue of the blood of Jesus,
HEB 10:20 by the way which he inaugurated for us – a new and living way, a way through the sanctuary curtain (that is, his human nature);
HEB 10:21 and, since we have in him “a great priest set over the house of God,”
HEB 10:22 let us draw near to God in all sincerity of heart and in perfect faith, with our hearts purified by the sprinkled blood from all consciousness of wrong, and with our bodies washed with pure water.
HEB 10:23 Let us maintain the confession of our hope unshaken, for he who has given us his promise will not fail us.
HEB 10:24 Let us vie with one another in a rivalry of love and noble actions.
HEB 10:25 And let us not, as some do, cease to meet together; but, on the contrary, let us encourage one another, and all the more, now that you see the day drawing near.
HEB 10:26 Remember, if we sin wilfully after we have gained a full knowledge of the truth, there can be no further sacrifice for sin;
HEB 10:27 there is only a fearful anticipation of judgment, and a burning indignation which will destroy all opponents.
HEB 10:28 When someone disregarded the Law of Moses, they were, on the evidence of two or three witnesses, put to death without pity.
HEB 10:29 How much worse then, think you, will be the punishment deserved by those who have trampled underfoot the Son of God, who have treated the blood that rendered the covenant valid – the blood by which they were purified – as if it were not holy, and who have outraged the Spirit of love?
HEB 10:30 We know who it was that said – “It is for me to avenge, I will requite”; and again – “The Lord will judge his people.”
HEB 10:31 It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
HEB 10:32 Call to mind those early days in which, after you had received the light, you patiently underwent a long and painful conflict.
HEB 10:33 Sometimes, in consequence of the taunts and injuries heaped on you, you became a public spectacle; and sometimes you suffered through having shown yourselves to be the friends of people who were in the same position in which you had been.
HEB 10:34 For you not only sympathised with those who were in prison, but you even took the confiscation of your possessions joyfully, knowing, as you did, that you had in yourselves a greater possession and a lasting one.
HEB 10:35 Do not, therefore, abandon the confidence that you have gained, for it has a great reward awaiting it.
HEB 10:36 You still have need of patient endurance, in order that, when you have done God’s will, you may obtain the fulfilment of his promise.
HEB 10:37 “For there is indeed but a very little while before he who is coming will have come, without delay;
HEB 10:38 and through faith the righteous will find life, but, if anyone draws back, my heart can find no pleasure in them.”
HEB 10:39 But we do not belong to those who draw back, to their ruin, but to those who have faith, to the saving of their souls.
HEB 11:1 Faith is the realisation of things hoped for – the proof of things not seen.
HEB 11:2 And it was for faith that the people of old were renowned.
HEB 11:3 Faith enables us to perceive that the universe was created at the bidding of God – so that we know that what we see was not made out of visible things.
HEB 11:4 Faith made the sacrifice which Abel offered to God a better sacrifice than Cain’s, and won him renown as a righteous man, God himself establishing his renown by accepting his gifts; and it is by the example of his faith that Abel, though dead, still speaks.
HEB 11:5 Faith led to Enoch’s removal from earth, so that he might not experience death. “He could not be found because God had removed him.” For, before his removal, he was renowned as having pleased God;
HEB 11:6 but without faith it is impossible to please him, for he who comes to God must believe that God exists, and that he rewards those who seek for him.
HEB 11:7 It was faith that enabled Noah, after he had received the divine warning about what could not then be foreseen, to build, in reverent obedience, an ark in which to save his family. By his faith he condemned the world, and became possessed of that righteousness which follows on faith.
HEB 11:8 It was faith that enabled Abraham to obey the call that he received, and to set out for the place which he was afterwards to obtain as his own; and he set out not knowing where he was going.
HEB 11:9 It was faith that made him go to live as an emigrant in the promised land – as in a strange country – living there in tents with Isaac and Jacob, who shared the promise with him.
HEB 11:10 For he was looking for the city with the sure foundations, whose architect and builder is God.
HEB 11:11 Again, it was faith that enabled Sarah to conceive (though she was past the age for childbearing), because she felt sure that he who had given her the promise would not fail her.
HEB 11:12 And so from one man – and that when his powers were dead – there sprang a people as numerous “as the stars in the heavens or the countless grains of sand on the shore.”
HEB 11:13 All these died sustained by faith. They did not obtain the promised blessings, but they saw them from a distance and welcomed the sight, and they acknowledged themselves to be only foreigners and strangers on the earth.
HEB 11:14 Those who speak like this show plainly that they are seeking their homeland.
HEB 11:15 If they had been thinking of the land that they had left, they could have found opportunities to return.
HEB 11:16 But no, they were longing for a better, a heavenly, land! And therefore God was not ashamed to be called their God; indeed he had already prepared them a city.
HEB 11:17 It was faith that enabled Abraham, when put to the test, to offer Isaac as a sacrifice – he who had received the promises offering up his only son,
HEB 11:18 of whom it had been said – “It is through Isaac that there will be descendants to bear your name.”
HEB 11:19 For he argued that God was even able to raise a man from the dead – and indeed, figuratively speaking, Abraham did receive Isaac back from the dead.
HEB 11:20 It was faith that enabled Isaac to bless Jacob and Esau, even with regard to the future.
HEB 11:21 Faith enabled Jacob, when dying, to give his blessing to each of the sons of Joseph, and “to bow himself in worship as he leant on the top of his staff.”
HEB 11:22 Faith caused Joseph, when his end was near, to speak of the future migration of the Israelites, and to give instructions with regard to his bones.
HEB 11:23 Faith caused the parents of Moses to hide the child for three months after his birth, for they saw that he was a beautiful child; and they would not respect the king’s order.
HEB 11:24 It was faith that caused Moses, when he was grown up, to refuse the title of “son of a daughter of Pharaoh.”
HEB 11:25 He preferred sharing the hardships of God’s people to enjoying the short-lived pleasures of sin.
HEB 11:26 For he counted “the reproaches that are heaped on the Christ” of greater value than the treasures of Egypt, looking forward, as he did, to the reward awaiting him.
HEB 11:27 Faith caused him to leave Egypt, though undaunted by the king’s anger, for he was strengthened in his endurance by the vision of the invisible God.
HEB 11:28 Faith led him to institute the Passover and the sprinkling of the blood, so that the Destroyer might not touch the eldest children of the Israelites.
HEB 11:29 Faith enabled the people to cross the Red Sea, as if it had been dry land, while the Egyptians, when they attempted to do so, were drowned.
HEB 11:30 Faith caused the walls of Jericho to fall after being encircled for seven days.
HEB 11:31 Faith saved Rahab, the prostitute, from perishing with the unbelievers, after she had entertained the spies with friendliness.
HEB 11:32 Need I add anything more? Time would fail me if I attempted to relate the stories of Gideon, Barak, Samson, and Jephthah, and those of David, Samuel, and the prophets.
HEB 11:33 By their faith they subdued kingdoms, ruled righteously, gained the fulfilment of God’s promises, shut the mouths of lions,
HEB 11:34 quelled the fury of the flames, escaped the edge of the sword, found strength in the hour of weakness, displayed their prowess in war, and routed hostile armies.
HEB 11:35 Women received back their dead raised to life. Some were tortured on the wheel, and refused release in order that they might rise to a better life.
HEB 11:36 Others had to face taunts and blows, and even chains and imprisonment.
HEB 11:37 They were stoned to death, they were tortured, they were swan asunder, they were put to the sword; they wandered about clothed in the skins of sheep or goats, destitute, persecuted, ill-used –
HEB 11:38 people of whom the world was not worthy – roaming in lonely places, and on the mountains, and in caves and holes in the ground.
HEB 11:39 Yet, though they all won renown by their faith, they did not obtain the final fulfilment of God’s promise;
HEB 11:40 since God had in view some better thing for us, so that they would only reach perfection together with us.
HEB 12:1 Seeing, therefore, that there is on every side of us such a throng of witnesses, let us also lay aside everything that hinders us, and the sin that clings about us, and run with patient endurance the race that lies before us,
HEB 12:2 our eyes fixed on Jesus, the leader and perfect example of our faith, who, for the joy that lay before him, endured the cross, heedless of its shame, and now “has taken his seat at the right hand” of the throne of God.
HEB 12:3 Weigh well the example of him who had to endure such opposition from “people who were sinning against themselves,” so that you should not grow weary or faint-hearted.
HEB 12:4 You have not yet, in your struggle with sin, resisted to the death;
HEB 12:5 and you have forgotten the encouraging words which are addressed to you as God’s children – “My child, think not lightly of the Lord’s discipline, do not despond when he rebukes you;
HEB 12:6 For it is him whom he loves that he disciplines, and he chastises every child whom he acknowledges.”
HEB 12:7 It is for your discipline that you have to endure all this. God is dealing with you as his children. For where is there a child whom his father does not discipline?
HEB 12:8 If you are left without that discipline, in which all children share, it shows that you are bastards, and not true children.
HEB 12:9 Further, when our earthly fathers disciplined us, we respected them. Should we not, then, much rather yield submission to the Father of souls, and live?
HEB 12:10 Our fathers disciplined us for only a short time and as seemed best to them; but God disciplines us for our true good, to enable us to share his holiness.
HEB 12:11 No discipline is pleasant at the time; on the contrary, it is painful. But afterwards its fruit is seen in the peacefulness of a righteous life which is the lot of those who have been trained under it.
HEB 12:12 Therefore “lift again the down-dropped hands and straighten the weakened knees;
HEB 12:13 make straight paths for your feet,” so that the lame limb may not be put out of joint, but rather be cured.
HEB 12:14 Try earnestly to live at peace with everyone, and to attain to that purity without which no one will see the Lord.
HEB 12:15 Take care that no one fails to use the loving help of God, “that no bitterness is allowed to take root and spring up, and cause trouble,” and so poison the whole community.
HEB 12:16 Take care that no one becomes immoral, or irreligious like Esau, who sold his birthright for a single meal.
HEB 12:17 For you know that even afterwards, when he wished to claim his father’s blessing, he was rejected – for he never found an opportunity to repair his error – though he begged for the blessing with tears.
HEB 12:18 It is not to tangible “flaming fire” that you have drawn near, nor to “gloom, and darkness, and storm,
HEB 12:19 and the blast of a trumpet, and an audible voice.” Those who heard that voice entreated that they might hear no more,
HEB 12:20 for they could not bear to think of the command – “If even an animal touches the mountain, it is to be stoned to death;”
HEB 12:21 and so fearful was the sight that Moses said – “I tremble with fear.”
HEB 12:22 No, but it is to Mount Zion that you have drawn near, the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to countless hosts of angels,
HEB 12:23 to the festal gathering and assemblage of God’s firstborn whose names are enrolled in heaven, to God the judge of all people, to the spirits of the righteous who have attained perfection,
HEB 12:24 to Jesus, the intermediary of a new covenant, and to the sprinkled blood that tells of better things than the blood of Abel.
HEB 12:25 Beware how you refuse to hear him who is speaking. For, if the Israelites did not escape punishment, when they refused to listen to him who taught them on earth the divine will, far worse will it be for us, if we turn away from him who is teaching us from heaven.
HEB 12:26 Then his voice shook the earth, but now his declaration is – “Still once more I will cause not only the earth to tremble, but also the heavens.”
HEB 12:27 And those words “still once more” indicate the passing away of all that is shaken – that is, of all created things – in order that only what is unshaken may remain.
HEB 12:28 Therefore, let us, who have received a kingdom that cannot be shaken, be thankful, and so offer acceptable worship to God, with awe and the deepest respect.
HEB 12:29 For our God is “a consuming fire.”
HEB 13:1 Let your love for the Lord’s followers continue.
HEB 13:2 Do not neglect to show hospitality; for, through being hospitable, people have all unawares entertained angels.
HEB 13:3 Remember the prisoners, as if you were their fellow prisoners, and the oppressed, not forgetting that you also are still in the body.
HEB 13:4 Let marriage be honoured by all and the married life be pure; for God will judge those who are immoral and those who commit adultery.
HEB 13:5 Do not let your conduct be ruled by the love of money. Be content with what you have, for God himself has said – “I will never forsake you, nor will I ever abandon you.”
HEB 13:6 Therefore we may say with confidence – “The Lord is my helper, I will not be afraid. What can mere people do to me?”
HEB 13:7 Do not forget your leaders, who told you God’s message. Recall the close of their lives, and imitate their faith.
HEB 13:8 Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today – yes, and for ever!
HEB 13:9 Do not let yourselves be carried away by the various novel forms of teaching. It is better to rely for spiritual strength on the divine help, than on regulations regarding food; for those whose lives are guided by such regulations have not found them of service.
HEB 13:10 We are not without an altar; but it is one at which those who still worship in the tent have no right to eat.
HEB 13:11 The bodies of those animals whose blood is brought by the high priest into the sanctuary, as an offering for sin, are burnt outside the camp.
HEB 13:12 And so Jesus, also, to purify the people by his own blood, suffered outside the gate.
HEB 13:13 Therefore let us go out to him “outside the camp,” bearing the same reproaches as he;
HEB 13:14 for here we have no permanent city, but are looking for the city that is to be.
HEB 13:15 Through him let us offer, as our sacrifice, continual praise to God – an offering from lips that glorify his name.
HEB 13:16 Never forget to do kindly acts and to share what you have with others, for such sacrifices are acceptable to God.
HEB 13:17 Obey your leaders, and submit to their control, for they are watching over your souls, since they will have to render an account, so that they may do it with joy, and not in sorrow. That would not be to your advantage.
HEB 13:18 Pray for us, for we are sure that our consciences are clear, since our wish is to be occupied with what is good.
HEB 13:19 And I the more earnestly ask for your prayers, so that I may be restored to you the sooner.
HEB 13:20 May God, the source of all peace, who brought back from the dead him who, “by virtue of the blood that rendered valid the unchangeable covenant, is the great shepherd of God’s Sheep,” Jesus, our Lord –
HEB 13:21 may God make you perfect in everything that is good, so that you may be able to do his will. May he bring out in us all that is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be all glory for ever and ever. Amen.
HEB 13:22 I beg you, friends, to bear with these words of advice. For I have written only very briefly to you.
HEB 13:23 You will be glad to hear that our friend, Timothy, has been set free. If he comes here soon, we will visit you together.
HEB 13:24 Give our greeting to all your leaders, and to all Christ’s people. Our friends from Italy send their greetings to you.
HEB 13:25 May God bless you all.
JAM 1:1 James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, greets the twelve tribes that are living abroad.
JAM 1:2 My friends, whatever trials you may face from time to time, always regard them as a reason for rejoicing,
JAM 1:3 knowing, as you do, that the testing of your faith develops endurance.
JAM 1:4 And let endurance do its work perfectly, so that you may be altogether perfect, and in no respect lacking.
JAM 1:5 If any one of you lacks wisdom, they should ask wisdom from the God who gives freely to everyone without reproach, and it will be given to them.
JAM 1:6 But they should ask with confidence, never doubting; for the person who doubts is like a wave of the sea driven here and there at the mercy of the wind –
JAM 1:7 Such a person must not expect that they will receive anything from the Lord,
JAM 1:8 vacillating as they are, irresolute at every turn.
JAM 1:9 Let a follower in humble circumstances be proud of their exalted position,
JAM 1:10 but a rich follower of their humiliation; for the rich will pass away like a wild flower.
JAM 1:11 As the sun rises, and the hot wind blows, the plant withers, its flower fades, and all its beauty is gone. So is it with the rich. In the midst of their pursuits they will wither away.
JAM 1:12 Blessed is the person who remains firm under temptation, for, when they have stood the test, they will receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to those who love him.
JAM 1:13 Let no one say, when they are tempted, ‘It is God who is tempting me!’ For God, who cannot be tempted to do wrong, does not himself tempt anyone.
JAM 1:14 A man is in every case tempted by their own passions – allured and enticed by them.
JAM 1:15 Then passion conceives and gives birth to sin, and sin, on reaching maturity, brings forth death.
JAM 1:16 Do not be deceived, my dear friends.
JAM 1:17 Every good thing given us, and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down to us from the Father of the lights in the heavens, who is himself never subject to change or to eclipse.
JAM 1:18 Because he so willed, he gave us life, through the message of the truth, so that we should be, as it were, a kind of first fruits of his creation.
JAM 1:19 Mark this, my dear friends – Let everyone be quick to listen, slow to speak, and slow to get angry;
JAM 1:20 for human anger does not forward the righteous purpose of God.
JAM 1:21 Therefore, get rid of all filthiness and whatever wickedness still remains, and in a humble spirit receive that message which has been planted in your hearts and is able to save your souls.
JAM 1:22 Put that message into practice, and do not merely listen to it – deceiving yourselves.
JAM 1:23 For, when anyone listens to it and does not practice it, they are like a person looking at their own face in a mirror.
JAM 1:24 They look at themselves, then go on their way,
JAM 1:25 but the person who looks carefully into the perfect Law, the Law of freedom, and continues to do so, not listening to it and then forgetting it, but putting it into practice – that person will be blessed in what they do.
JAM 1:26 When a person appears to be religious, yet does not bridle their tongue, but imposes on their own conscience, that person’s religious observances are valueless.
JAM 1:27 That religious observance which is pure and spotless in the eyes of God our Father is this – to visit orphans and widows in their trouble, and to keep oneself uncontaminated by the world.
JAM 2:1 My friends, are you really trying to combine faith in Jesus Christ, our glorified Lord, with discrimination?
JAM 2:2 Suppose a visitor should enter your synagogue, with gold rings and in grand clothes, and suppose a poor man should come in also, in shabby clothes,
JAM 2:3 and you show more respect to the visitor who is wearing grand clothes, and say – ‘There is a good seat for you here,’ but to the poor man – ‘You must stand; or sit down there by my footstool,’
JAM 2:4 Haven’t you made distinctions among yourselves, and used evil standards of judgement?
JAM 2:5 Listen, my dear friends. Has not God chosen those who are poor in the things of this world to be rich through their faith, and to possess the kingdom which he has promised to those who love him?
JAM 2:6 But you – you insult the poor man! Isn’t it the rich who oppress you? Isn’t it they who drag you into law courts?
JAM 2:7 Isn’t it they who malign that honourable name spoken over you at your baptism?
JAM 2:8 If you keep the royal law which runs – “You must love your neighbour as you love yourself,” you are doing right;
JAM 2:9 but, if you discriminate, you commit a sin, and stand convicted by that same law of being offenders against it.
JAM 2:10 For a person who has laid the Law, as a whole, to heart, but has failed in one particular, is accountable for breaking all its provisions.
JAM 2:11 He who said “You must not commit adultery” also said “You must not murder.” If, then, you commit murder but not adultery, you are still an offender against the Law.
JAM 2:12 Therefore, speak and act as people who are to be judged by the “Law of freedom.”
JAM 2:13 For there will be justice without mercy for the person who has not acted mercifully. Mercy triumphs over Justice.
JAM 2:14 My friends, what good is it if someone claims that they have faith, but they do not prove it by actions? Can such faith save them?
JAM 2:15 Suppose some brother or sister should be in need of clothes and of daily bread,
JAM 2:16 and one of you says to them – ‘Go, and peace be with you; keep warm and eat well!’ and yet you do not actually give them the necessities of life, what good would it be to them?
JAM 2:17 In just the same way faith, if not followed by actions, is, by itself, a lifeless thing.
JAM 2:18 Someone, indeed, may say – ‘You are a man of faith, and I am a man of action.’ ‘Then show me your faith,’ I reply, ‘apart from any actions, and I will show you my faith by my actions.’
JAM 2:19 It is a part of your faith, is it not, that there is one God? Good; yet even the demons have that faith, and tremble at the thought.
JAM 2:20 Now do you really want to understand, fool, how it is that faith without actions leads to nothing?
JAM 2:21 Look at our ancestor, Abraham. Was he not justified by his actions after he had offered his son, Isaac, on the altar?
JAM 2:22 You see how, in his case, faith and actions went together; that his faith was perfected as the result of his actions;
JAM 2:23 and that in this way the words of scripture came true – ‘Abraham believed God, and that was regarded by God as righteousness,’ and ‘He was called the friend of God.’
JAM 2:24 You see, then, that a person is justified by actions, and not by faith alone.
JAM 2:25 Wasn’t it the same with the prostitute, Rahab? Was she not justified by her actions, after she had welcomed the messengers and helped them escape by another road?
JAM 2:26 Just as a body is dead without a spirit, so faith is dead without actions.
JAM 3:1 Not many of you should become teachers, my friends, because you know that we who teach will be judged more strictly than others.
JAM 3:2 We often make mistakes, every one of us. Anyone who does not make mistakes when speaking is indeed a perfect person, able to bridle their whole body as well.
JAM 3:3 When we put bits into horses’ mouths to make them obey us, we change their course the rest of their bodies.
JAM 3:4 Again, think of ships. Large as they are, and even when driven by fierce winds, they are guided by a very small rudder and steered in whatever direction the man at the helm may determine.
JAM 3:5 So is it with the tongue. Small as it is, it is a great boaster. Think how a tiny spark may set the largest forest ablaze!
JAM 3:6 And the tongue is like a spark. It is a world of unrighteousness among the parts of our body. It contaminates the whole body; it sets the whole course of our existence on fire, and is itself set on fire by the flames of Gehenna.
JAM 3:7 For while all kinds of animals, birds and reptiles and sea creatures can be tamed and have been tamed by humans,
JAM 3:8 no human being can tame the tongue. It is a restless plague! It is charged with deadly poison!
JAM 3:9 With it we bless our Lord and Father, and with it we curse people who are made “in God’s likeness.”
JAM 3:10 From the very same mouth come blessings and curses! My friends, it is not right that this should be so.
JAM 3:11 Does a spring give both good and bad water from the same source?
JAM 3:12 Can a fig tree, my friends, bear olives? Or a vine bear figs? No, nor can a brackish well give good water.
JAM 3:13 Who among you claims to be wise and intelligent? They should show that their actions are the outcome of a good life lived in the humility of true wisdom.
JAM 3:14 But if you harbour bitter envy and a spirit of rivalry in your hearts, do not boast or deny the truth.
JAM 3:15 That is not the wisdom which comes from above; no, it is earthly, animalistic, demonic.
JAM 3:16 For where envy and rivalry exist, there you will also find disorder and all kinds of bad, worthless actions.
JAM 3:17 But the wisdom from above is, before everything else, pure; then peace-loving, gentle, open to conviction, rich in compassion and good deeds, and free from partiality and insincerity.
JAM 3:18 Justice is the harvest peacemakers will reap from seeds sown in a spirit of peace.
JAM 4:1 What is the cause of the fighting and quarrelling that goes on among you? Isn’t it to be found in the desires which are always at war within you?
JAM 4:2 You crave, yet do not have, so you commit murder, so You covet, yet cannot gain your end. You quarrel and fight. You do not have, because you do not ask.
JAM 4:3 You ask, yet do not receive, because you ask for a wrong purpose – to spend what you get on your pleasures.
JAM 4:4 Unfaithful people! Don’t you know that to be friends with the world means to be at enmity with God? Therefore whoever chooses to be friends with the world makes himself an enemy to God.
JAM 4:5 Do you suppose scripture means nothing when it says, “Envy results from the longings of the spirit which God has implanted within you?”
JAM 4:6 But he gives us greater grace; and that is why it says, – “God opposes the haughty, but gives grace to the humble.”
JAM 4:7 Therefore submit to God. Stand up to the devil, and he will flee from you.
JAM 4:8 Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Make your hands clean, you sinners; and your hearts pure, you vacillators!
JAM 4:9 Grieve, mourn, and lament! Let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your happiness to gloom!
JAM 4:10 Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will exalt you.
JAM 4:11 Do not disparage one another, friends. The person who disparages others, or passes judgment on them, disparages the Law and passes judgment on the Law. But, if you pass judgment on the Law, you are not obeying it, but judging it.
JAM 4:12 There is only one lawgiver and judge – he who has the power both to save and to destroy. So then who are you to pass judgment on your neighbour?
JAM 4:13 Listen to me, you who say “Today or tomorrow we will go to such and such a town and spend a year there, doing business and making money,”
JAM 4:14 yet you do not know what your life will be like tomorrow! For you are but a puff of smoke that appears for a little while and then vanishes.
JAM 4:15 Instead you should say “If the Lord wills, we will live and do this or that.”
JAM 4:16 But as it is, you are boasting presumptuously! All such boasting is wicked.
JAM 4:17 The person, then, who knows what is right but fails to do it – that is sin in them.
JAM 5:1 Listen to me, you rich people, weep and wail for the miseries that are coming upon you!
JAM 5:2 Your riches have wasted away, and your clothes have become moth-eaten.
JAM 5:3 Your gold and silver are rusted; and the rust on them will be evidence against you, and will eat into your flesh. It was fire, so to speak, that you stored up for yourselves in these last days.
JAM 5:4 Listen! The wages you have held back from the labourers who mowed your fields are crying out against you, and the outcries of your harvesters have reached the ears of the Lord of Hosts!
JAM 5:5 You have lived on earth a life of extravagance and luxury; you have indulged your fancies in a time of bloodshed.
JAM 5:6 You have condemned, you have murdered, the righteous one! Must not God be opposed to you?
JAM 5:7 Be patient, then, friends, until the coming of the Lord. Even the farmer has to wait for the precious fruit of the earth, watching over it patiently, until it has had the spring and summer rains.
JAM 5:8 And you must be patient also, and not be discouraged; for the Lord’s coming is near.
JAM 5:9 Do not make complaints against one another, friends, or judgment will be passed on you. The judge is already standing at the door!
JAM 5:10 Friends, as an example of the patient endurance of suffering, take the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.
JAM 5:11 We count those who displayed such endurance blessed! You have heard, too, of Job’s endurance, and have seen what the Lord’s purpose was, for “the Lord is full of pity and compassion.”
JAM 5:12 Above all things, my friends, never take an oath, either by heaven, or by earth, or by anything else. Let your “Yes” suffice for yes, and “No” for no, so that you may escape condemnation.
JAM 5:13 If anyone of you is in trouble, they should pray; if anyone is happy, they should sing hymns.
JAM 5:14 If anyone of you is ill, they should send for the church elders, and let them pray over them, anointing them with oil in the name of the Lord.
JAM 5:15 The prayer offered in faith will save the person who is sick, and the Lord will raise them from their bed; and if they have committed sins, they will be forgiven.
JAM 5:16 Therefore, confess your sins to one another and pray for one another, so that you may be cured. Great is the power of a good person’s fervent prayer.
JAM 5:17 Elijah was only human like ourselves, but, when he prayed fervently that it might not rain, no rain fell on the land for three and a half years.
JAM 5:18 And, when he prayed again, the clouds brought rain, and the land bore crops.
JAM 5:19 My friends, should one of you be led astray from the truth, and someone bring them back again,
JAM 5:20 be sure that the person who brings a sinner back from their mistaken ways will save that person’s soul from death, and will cover a multitude of sins.
1PE 1:1 To the people of God who are living abroad, dispersed throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Roman Asia, and Bithynia,
1PE 1:2 and who were chosen in accordance with the foreknowledge of God the Father, through the consecration of the Spirit, to learn obedience, and to be purified by the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, from Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ. May blessing and peace be yours in ever increasing measure.
1PE 1:3 Blessed is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has, in his great mercy, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
1PE 1:4 given us the new life of undying hope, that promises an inheritance, imperishable, stainless, unfading, which has been reserved for you in heaven –
1PE 1:5 for you who, through faith, are being guarded by the power of God, awaiting a salvation that is ready to be revealed in the last days.
1PE 1:6 At the thought of this you are full of exultation, though (if it has been necessary) you have suffered for the moment somewhat from various trials;
1PE 1:7 that the genuineness of your faith – a thing far more precious than gold, which is perishable, yet has to be tested by fire – may win praise and glory and honour at the appearing of Jesus Christ.
1PE 1:8 Though you have never seen him, yet you love him; though you do not even now see him, yet you believe in him, and exalt with a triumphant happiness too great for words,
1PE 1:9 as you receive the reward of your faith in the salvation of your souls!
1PE 1:10 It was this salvation that the prophets, who spoke long ago of the blessing intended for you, sought, and strove to comprehend;
1PE 1:11 as they strove to discern what that time could be, to which the Spirit of Christ within them was pointing, when foretelling the sufferings that Christ would have to endure, and the glories that would follow.
1PE 1:12 And it was revealed to them that it was not for themselves, but for you, that they were acting as Ministers of the truths which have now been told to you, by those who, with the help of the Holy Spirit sent from heaven, have brought you the good news – truths into which even angels long to look.
1PE 1:13 Therefore concentrate your minds, with the strictest self-control, and fix your hopes on the blessing that is coming for you at the appearing of Jesus Christ.
1PE 1:14 Be like obedient children; do not let your lives be shaped by the passions which once swayed you in the days of your ignorance,
1PE 1:15 but in your whole life show yourselves to be holy, after the pattern of the Holy One from whom you received your call.
1PE 1:16 For scripture says – “You will be holy, because I am holy.”
1PE 1:17 And since you call on him as “Father,” who judges everyone impartially by what he has done, let respectful awe be the spirit of your lives during the time of your stay on earth.
1PE 1:18 For you know that it was not by perishable things, such as silver and gold, that you were ransomed from the aimless way of living which was handed down to you from your ancestors,
1PE 1:19 but by precious blood, as it were of a lamb, unblemished and spotless, the blood of Christ.
1PE 1:20 Destined for this before the beginning of the world, he has been revealed in these last days for your sakes,
1PE 1:21 who, through him, are faithful to God who raised him from the dead and gave him honour, so that your faith and hope are now in God.
1PE 1:22 Now that, by your obedience to the truth, you have purified your lives, so that there is growing up among you a genuine affection, love one another earnestly with all your hearts;
1PE 1:23 since your new life has come, not from perishable, but imperishable, seed, through the message of the Everliving God.
1PE 1:24 For – “All earthly life is but as grass, and all its splendour as the flower of grass. The grass fades, its flower falls,
1PE 1:25 but the teaching of the Lord remains for ever.” And that is the teaching of the good news which has been told to you.
1PE 2:1 Now that you have done with all malice, all deceitfulness, insincerity, jealous feelings, and all backbiting,
1PE 2:2 like newly born infants, crave pure spiritual milk, so that you may be enabled by it to grow until you attain salvation –
1PE 2:3 since “you have found by experience that the Lord is kind.”
1PE 2:4 Come to him, then, as to a living stone, rejected, indeed, by men, but in God’s eyes choice and precious;
1PE 2:5 and, as living stones, form yourselves into a spiritual house, to be a consecrated priesthood, for the offering of spiritual sacrifices that will be acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
1PE 2:6 For there is a passage of scripture that runs – “See, I am placing in Zion a choice and precious cornerstone; and those who believe in him will have no cause for shame.”
1PE 2:7 It is to you, then, who believe in him that he is precious, but to those who do not believe he is “a stone which, though rejected by the builders, has now itself become the corner-stone,”
1PE 2:8 and “a stumbling-block, and a rock which will prove a hindrance.” They stumble because they do not accept the message. This was the fate destined for them.
1PE 2:9 But you are “a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a consecrated nation, God’s own people,” entrusted with the proclamation of the goodness of him who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.
1PE 2:10 Once you were “not a people,” but now you are “God’s people”; once you “had not found mercy,” but now you “have found mercy.”
1PE 2:11 Dear friends, I beg you, as pilgrims and strangers on earth, to refrain from indulging the cravings of your earthly nature, for they make war on the soul.
1PE 2:12 Let your daily life among the Gentiles be so upright, that, whenever they malign you as evildoers, they may learn, as they watch, from the uprightness of your conduct, to praise God “at the time when he will visit them.”
1PE 2:13 Submit to all human institutions for the Lord’s sake, alike to the emperor as the supreme authority,
1PE 2:14 and to governors as sent by him to punish evildoers and to commend those who do right.
1PE 2:15 For God’s will is this – that you should silence the ignorance of foolish people by doing what is right.
1PE 2:16 Act as free people, yet not using your freedom as those do who make it a cloak for wickedness, but as Servants of God.
1PE 2:17 Show honour to everyone, love the Lord’s followers, “revere God, honour the emperor.”
1PE 2:18 Those of you who are domestic servants should always be submissive and respectful to their masters, not only to those who are good and considerate, but also to those who are arbitrary.
1PE 2:19 For this wins God’s approval when, because conscious of God’s presence, a person who is suffering unjustly bears their troubles patiently.
1PE 2:20 What credit can you claim when, after doing wrong, you take your punishment for it patiently? But, on the other hand, if, after doing right, you take your sufferings patiently, that does win the approval of God.
1PE 2:21 For it was to this that you were called! For Christ, too, suffered – on your behalf – and left you an example, that you should follow in his steps.
1PE 2:22 He “never sinned, nor was anything deceitful ever heard from his lips.”
1PE 2:23 He was abused, but he did not answer with abuse; he suffered, but he did not threaten; he entrusted himself to him whose judgments are just.
1PE 2:24 And he “himself carried our sins” in his own body to the cross, so that we might die to our sins, and live for righteousness. “His bruising was your healing.”
1PE 2:25 Once you were straying like sheep, but now you have returned to the shepherd and guardian of your souls.
1PE 3:1 Again, you married women should submit to your husbands, so that if any of them reject the message, they may, apart from the message, be won over, by the conduct of their wives,
1PE 3:2 as they see your pure, reverent conduct.
1PE 3:3 Yours should be, not the external adornment of the arrangement of the hair, the wearing of jewellery, or the putting on of dresses,
1PE 3:4 but the inner life with the imperishable beauty of a quiet and gentle spirit; for this is very precious in God’s sight.
1PE 3:5 It was by this that the holy women of old, who rested their hopes on God, adorned themselves; submitting to their husbands,
1PE 3:6 as Sarah did, who obeyed Abraham, and called him master. And you are her true children, as long as you live good lives, and let nothing terrify you.
1PE 3:7 Again, those of you who are married men should live considerately with their wives, showing due regard to their sex, as physically weaker than their own, and not forgetting that they share with you in the gift of life. Then you will be able to pray without hindrance.
1PE 3:8 Lastly, you should all be united, sympathetic, full of love for each other, kind-hearted, humble-minded;
1PE 3:9 never returning evil for evil, or abuse for abuse, but, on the contrary, blessing. It was to this that you were called – to obtain a blessing!
1PE 3:10 “The person who wants to enjoy life and see happy days – they should keep their tongue from evil and their lips from deceitful words,
1PE 3:11 they should turn from evil and do good, They should seek for peace and follow after it;
1PE 3:12 For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous, and his ears are attentive to their prayers, but the face of the Lord is set against those who do wrong.”
1PE 3:13 Who, indeed, is there to harm you, if you prove yourselves to be eager for what is good?
1PE 3:14 Even if you should suffer for righteousness, count yourselves blessed! “Do not let people terrify you, or allow yourselves to be dismayed.”
1PE 3:15 Revere the Christ as Lord in your hearts; always ready to give an answer to anyone who asks your reason for the hope that you cherish, but giving it with courtesy and respect,
1PE 3:16 and keeping your consciences clear, so that, whenever you are maligned, those who vilify your good and Christian conduct may be put to shame.
1PE 3:17 It is better that you should suffer, if that should be God’s will, for doing right, than for doing wrong.
1PE 3:18 For Christ himself died to atone for sins once for all – the good on behalf of the bad – that he might bring you to God; his body being put to death, but his spirit entering on new life.
1PE 3:19 And it was then that he went and preached to the imprisoned spirits,
1PE 3:20 who once were disobedient, at the time when God patiently waited, in the days of Noah, while the ark was being prepared; in which some few lives, eight in all, were saved by means of water.
1PE 3:21 And baptism, which this foreshadowed, now saves you – not the mere cleansing of the body, but the search of a clear conscience after God – through the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
1PE 3:22 who has gone into heaven, and is at God’s right hand, where angels and archangels and the powers of heaven now yield submission to him.
1PE 4:1 Since, then, Christ suffered in body, arm yourselves with the same resolve as he; for he who has suffered in body has ceased to sin,
1PE 4:2 and so will live the rest of his earthly life guided, not by human passions, but by the will of God.
1PE 4:3 Surely in the past you have spent time enough living as the Gentiles delight to live. For your path has lain among scenes of debauchery, licentiousness, drunkenness, revelry, hard-drinking, and profane idolatry.
1PE 4:4 And, because you do not run to the same extremes of profligacy as others, they are astonished, and malign you.
1PE 4:5 But they will have to answer for their conduct to him who is ready to judge both the living and the dead.
1PE 4:6 For that was why the good news was told to the dead also – that, after they have been judged in the body, as people are judged, they might live in the spirit, as God lives.
1PE 4:7 But the end of all things is near. Therefore exercise self-restraint and be calm, so that you may be able to pray.
1PE 4:8 Above all things, let your love for one another be earnest, for “Love throws a veil over countless sins.”
1PE 4:9 Never grudge hospitality to one another.
1PE 4:10 Whatever the gift that each has received, use it in the service of others, as good stewards of the varied bounty of God.
1PE 4:11 When anyone speaks, they should speak as one who is delivering the oracles of God. When anyone is endeavouring to serve others, they should do so in reliance on the strength which God supplies; so that in everything God may be honoured through Jesus Christ – to whom be ascribed all honour and might for ever and ever. Amen.
1PE 4:12 Dear friends, do not be astonished at the trial of fire that you are passing through, to test you, as though something strange were happening to you.
1PE 4:13 No, the more you share the sufferings of the Christ, the more may you rejoice, that, when the time comes for the manifestation of his glory, you may rejoice and exult.
1PE 4:14 If you are insulted for bearing the name of Christ, count yourselves blessed; because the divine glory and the Spirit of God are resting on you.
1PE 4:15 I need hardly say that no one among you must suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or a criminal, or for interfering in matters which do not concern Christians.
1PE 4:16 But, if someone suffers as a Christian, they should not be ashamed of it; they should bring honour to God even though they bear that name.
1PE 4:17 For the time has come for judgment to begin with the house of God; and, if it begins with us, what will be the end of those who reject God’s good news?
1PE 4:18 If “a good person is saved only with difficulty, what will become of the godless and the sinful?”
1PE 4:19 Therefore, I say, let those who suffer, because God wills it so, commit their lives into the hands of a faithful Creator, and persevere in doing right.
1PE 5:1 As for the older ones among you, who are elders in the church, I, their fellow elder, and a witness to the sufferings of the Christ, who will also share in the glory that is to be revealed –
1PE 5:2 I beg you to be true shepherds of the flock of God among you, not because you are compelled, but of your own free will; not from a base love of gain, but with a ready spirit;
1PE 5:3 not as lords of your charges, but as examples to your flock.
1PE 5:4 Then, when the chief shepherd appears, you will win the crown of glory that never fades.
1PE 5:5 Again, you younger ones should show deference to the older. And all of you should put on the badge of humility in mutual service, for “God is opposed to the proud, but gives his help to the humble.”
1PE 5:6 Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God, so that he may exalt you in his good time,
1PE 5:7 laying all your anxieties on him, for he makes you his care.
1PE 5:8 Exercise self-control, be watchful. Your adversary, the devil, like a roaring lion, is prowling about, eager to devour you.
1PE 5:9 Stand firm against him, strong in your faith; knowing, as you do, that the sufferings which you are undergoing are being endured to the full by the Lord’s followers throughout the world.
1PE 5:10 God, from whom all help comes, and who called you, by your union with Christ, into his eternal glory, will, when you have suffered for a little while, himself perfect, establish, strengthen you.
1PE 5:11 To him be ascribed dominion for ever. Amen.
1PE 5:12 I have been writing to you briefly by the hand of Silas, our true-hearted friend (for so I regard him), to encourage you, and to bear my testimony that in what I have written is to be found the true love of God. On that take your stand.
1PE 5:13 Your sister church in “Babylon” sends you greeting, and so does Mark, who is as a son to me.
1PE 5:14 Greet one another with the kiss of love. May God give his peace to you all in your union with Christ.
2PE 1:1 To those to whom, through the justice of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ, there has been granted faith equally privileged with our own, from Simon Peter, a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ.
2PE 1:2 May blessing and peace be yours in ever increasing measure, as you advance in the knowledge of God and of Jesus, our Lord.
2PE 1:3 For his divine power has given us everything that is needful for a life of piety, as we advance in the knowledge of him who called us by a glorious manifestation of his goodness.
2PE 1:4 For it was through this that he gave us what we prize as the greatest of his promises, that through them you might participate in the divine nature, now that you have fled from the corruption in the world, resulting from human passions.
2PE 1:5 Yes, and for this reason do your best to supplement your faith by goodness, goodness by knowledge,
2PE 1:6 knowledge by self-control, self-control by endurance, endurance by piety,
2PE 1:7 piety by mutual affection, and mutual affection by love.
2PE 1:8 For, when these virtues are yours, in increasing measure, they prevent your being indifferent to, or destitute of, a fuller knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
2PE 1:9 Surely the person who has not these virtues is shortsighted even to blindness, and has chosen to forget that they have been purified from their sins of the past!
2PE 1:10 Therefore, friends, do your best to put God’s call and selection of you beyond all doubt; for, if you do this, you will never fall.
2PE 1:11 For in this way you will be given a triumphant admission into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ.
2PE 1:12 I will, therefore, always be ready to remind you of all this, even though you know it and are firmly established in the truth that you now hold.
2PE 1:13 But I think it my duty, as long as I live in this “tent,” to rouse you by awakening memories of the past;
2PE 1:14 for I know that the time for this “tent” of mine to be put away is soon coming, as our Lord Jesus Christ himself assured me.
2PE 1:15 So I will do my best to enable you, at any time after my departure, to call these truths to mind.
2PE 1:16 For we were not following cleverly devised stories when we told you of the coming in power of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we had been eye-witnesses of his majesty.
2PE 1:17 For he received honour and glory from God the Father, when from the glory of the Divine Majesty there were borne to his ears words such as these – “This is my dearly loved son, who brings me great joy.”
2PE 1:18 These were the words that we heard, borne to our ears from heaven, when we were with him on that sacred mountain.
2PE 1:19 And still stronger is the assurance that we have in the teaching of the prophets; to which you will do well to pay attention (as if it were a lamp shining in a gloomy place), until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts.
2PE 1:20 But first be assured of this: There is no prophetic teaching found in scripture that can be interpreted by a person’s unaided reason;
2PE 1:21 for no prophetic teaching ever came in the old days at the mere wish of people, but people, moved by the Holy Spirit, spoke direct from God.
2PE 2:1 But there were false prophets also in the nation, just as there will be false teachers among you, people who will secretly introduce ruinous divisions, disowning even the Lord who bought them, and bringing speedy ruin on themselves.
2PE 2:2 There will be many, too, who will follow their licentious courses, and cause the way of the truth to be maligned.
2PE 2:3 In their covetousness they will try to make you a source of profit by their fabrications; but for a long time past their sentence has not been standing idle, nor their ruin slumbering.
2PE 2:4 Remember, God did not spare angels when they sinned, but sent them down to Tartarus, and consigned them to caverns of darkness, to be kept under guard for judgment.
2PE 2:5 Nor did he spare the world of old; though he preserved Noah, the preacher of righteousness, and seven others, when he brought a flood on the godless world.
2PE 2:6 He condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah and reduced them to ashes, holding them up as a warning to the godless of what was in store for them;
2PE 2:7 but he rescued righteous Lot, whose heart was vexed by the wanton licentiousness of his neighbours;
2PE 2:8 for, seeing and hearing what he did, as he lived his righteous life among them, day after day, Lot’s righteous soul was tortured by their wicked doings.
2PE 2:9 The Lord, therefore, knows how to deliver the pious from temptation, and to keep the wicked, who are even now suffering punishment, in readiness for “the day of judgment” –
2PE 2:10 especially those who, following the promptings of their lower nature, indulge their polluting passions and despise all control. Audacious and self-willed, they feel no awe of the celestial beings, maligning them,
2PE 2:11 even where angels, though excelling them in strength and power, do not bring against them a malignant charge before the Lord.
2PE 2:12 These people, however, like animals without reason, intended by nature to be caught and killed – these people, I say, malign those of whom they know nothing, and will assuredly perish through their own corruption,
2PE 2:13 suffering themselves, as the penalty for the suffering that they have inflicted. They think that pleasure consists in the self-indulgence of the moment. They are a stain and a disgrace, indulging, as they do, in their wanton revelry, even while joining you at your feasts.
2PE 2:14 They have eyes only for adulteresses, eyes never tired of sin; they entice weak souls; their minds are trained to covet; they live under a curse.
2PE 2:15 Leaving the straight road, they have gone astray and followed in the steps of Balaam, the son of Beor, who set his heart on the reward for wrongdoing,
2PE 2:16 but was rebuked for his offence. A dumb animal spoke with a human voice, and checked the prophet’s madness.
2PE 2:17 These people are like springs without water, or mists driven before a gale; and for them the blackest darkness has been reserved.
2PE 2:18 With boastful and foolish talk, they appeal to the passions of people’s lower nature, and, by their profligacy, entice those who are just escaping from the people who live such misguided lives.
2PE 2:19 They promise them freedom, while they themselves are slaves to corrupt habits; for a person is the slave of anything to which they give way.
2PE 2:20 If, after having escaped the polluting influences of the world, through knowing our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ, people are again entangled in them, and give way to them, their last state has become worse than their first.
2PE 2:21 It would, indeed, have been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after knowing it, to turn away from the holy command delivered to them.
2PE 2:22 In their case is seen the truth of the proverb – “A dog returns to what it has vomited” and “A sow after washing to her wallowing-place in the mud.”
2PE 3:1 This, dear friends, is my second letter to you. In both of them I have tried, by appealing to your remembrance, to arouse your better feelings.
2PE 3:2 I want you to recall what was foretold by the holy prophets, as well as the command of our Lord and Saviour given to you through your apostles.
2PE 3:3 First be assured of this, that, as the age draws to an end, scoffers, led by their own passions,
2PE 3:4 will come and ask scoffingly – “Where is his promised coming? Ever since our ancestors passed to their rest, everything remains just as it was when the world was first created!”
2PE 3:5 For they wilfully shut their eyes to the fact that long ago the heavens existed; and the earth, also – formed out of water and by the action of water, by the fiat of God;
2PE 3:6 and that by the same means the world which then existed was destroyed in a deluge of water.
2PE 3:7 But the present heavens and earth, by the same fiat, have been reserved for fire, and are being kept for the day of the judgment and destruction of the godless.
2PE 3:8 But you, dear friends, must never shut your eyes to the fact that, to the Lord, one day is the same as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.
2PE 3:9 The Lord is not slow to fulfil his promise, as some count slowness; but he is forbearing with you, as it is not his will that any of you should perish, but that all should be brought to repentance.
2PE 3:10 The day of the Lord will come like a thief; and on that day the heavens will pass away with a crash, the elements will be burnt up and dissolved, and the earth and all that is in it will be disclosed.
2PE 3:11 Now, since all these things are in the process of dissolution, think what you yourselves ought to be – what holy and pious lives you ought to lead,
2PE 3:12 while you wait for the coming of the day of God and strive to make it come soon. At its coming the heavens will be dissolved in fire, and the elements melted by heat,
2PE 3:13 but we look for new heavens and a new earth, where righteousness will have its home, in fulfilment of the promise of God.
2PE 3:14 Therefore, dear friends, in expectation of these things, make every effort to be found by him spotless, blameless, and at peace.
2PE 3:15 Regard our Lord’s forbearance as your one hope of salvation. This is what our dear friend Paul wrote to you, with the wisdom that God gave him.
2PE 3:16 It is the same in all his letters, when he speaks in them about these subjects. There are some things in them difficult to understand, which untaught and weak people distort, just as they do all other writings, to their own ruin.
2PE 3:17 You must, therefore, dear friends, now that you know this beforehand, be on your guard against being led away by the errors of reckless people, and so lapsing from your present steadfastness;
2PE 3:18 and advance in the love and knowledge of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ. All glory be to him now and for ever.
1JO 1:1 We write to you about the Word of life, which has been in existence from the beginning. We write of what we have heard, of what we have seen with our eyes, of what we watched reverently and touched with our hands.
1JO 1:2 That life was made visible, and we have seen it. We bear our testimony to it, and tell you of that eternal life which was with the Father and was made visible to us.
1JO 1:3 It is of what we have seen and heard that we now tell you, so that you may have fellowship with us. And our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son, Jesus Christ.
1JO 1:4 We are writing all this to you that our joy may be complete.
1JO 1:5 This is the message which we have heard from him and announce to you: God is light, and there is no darkness in him at all.
1JO 1:6 If we say that we have fellowship with him and yet continue to walk in the darkness, our words and our lives are a lie.
1JO 1:7 But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus, his Son, cleanses us from all sin.
1JO 1:8 If we say, ‘we have no sin,’ then we are deceiving ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
1JO 1:9 If we confess our sins, he is just and may be trusted to forgive our sins and cleanse us from all wrongdoing.
1JO 1:10 If we say that we haven’t sinned, we make God a liar, and his Word is not in us.
1JO 2:1 My children, I am writing to you to keep you from sinning. But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father – Jesus Christ, the righteous.
1JO 2:2 He is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not for ours only, but the sins of the whole world.
1JO 2:3 It is by keeping God’s commands that we can be sure we know him.
1JO 2:4 Whoever says ‘I know him,’ but does not keep his commands, is a liar. The truth has no place in them.
1JO 2:5 But the person who keeps God’s word, in them the love of God has indeed reached its perfection. This is how we can be sure we are in him:
1JO 2:6 whoever claims to live in him should live just as Jesus did.
1JO 2:7 Dear friends, it is no new command that I am writing to you, but an old command, which you have had from the beginning. That old command is the message you have already heard.
1JO 2:8 Yet, in a way, it is a new command that I am writing to you – which is shown true in Christ’s life and in yours – for the darkness is passing away and the true light is already shining.
1JO 2:9 The person who says that they are in the light, and yet hates others, is still in the darkness.
1JO 2:10 The person who loves others is always in the light, and there is nothing within them to cause them to stumble.
1JO 2:11 The person who hates is in the dark. They stumble along in the darkness; they do not know where they are going because the darkness blinds them.
1JO 2:12 Little children, I am writing to you because your sins have been forgiven for Christ’s sake.
1JO 2:13 Parents, I am writing to you because you have come to know him who has been from the beginning. Young people, I am writing to you because you have conquered the evil one. Children, I write to you because you have come to know the Father.
1JO 2:14 Parents, I write to you because you have learned to know him who has been from the beginning. Young people, I write to you because you are strong, and God’s message is always in your hearts, and you have conquered the evil one.
1JO 2:15 Do not love the world or what the world can offer. When anyone loves the world, there is no love for the Father in them.
1JO 2:16 For all that the world can offer – the desires for physical pleasure, the enticements to the eye, the arrogance of wealth – belongs, not to the Father, but to the world.
1JO 2:17 And the world, and all that it gratifies, is passing away, but they who do God’s will remain for ever.
1JO 2:18 My children, it is the last hour. You were told that an antichrist was coming; and many antichrists have already arisen. This is why we know that this is the last hour.
1JO 2:19 These people come from our ranks, but they were never truly part of us – if they had been then they would have stayed with us. They left so it would be clear that none of them really belonged to us.
1JO 2:20 You, however, have been annointed by the Holy One. You all know the truth.
1JO 2:21 I am not writing to you because you do not know the truth, but because you do know it, and because no lie can come from the truth.
1JO 2:22 Who is a liar, if not the one who denies that Jesus is the Christ? That person is the antichrist – one who rejects the Father and the Son.
1JO 2:23 No one who rejects the Son has the Father; to acknowledge the Son is to have the Father also.
1JO 2:24 As for you, you must let what you have heard from the beginning continue to live in you. If what you heard from the beginning dwells in you, you will remain both in the Son and the Father.
1JO 2:25 And this is what he himself promised us – eternal life!
1JO 2:26 In writing this to you, I have in mind those who are trying to mislead you.
1JO 2:27 As for you, the anointing which you received from him remains with you. You do not need anyone to teach you. His anointing teaches you about everything. What it teaches you is true, it is not a lie. Do what it has taught you: abide in him.
1JO 2:28 Yes, my children, remain in him, so that when he appears our confidence doesn’t fail us, and we are not ashamed to meet him at his coming.
1JO 2:29 Since you know he is righteous, you realise that everyone who does what is right is his child.
1JO 3:1 See what great love the Father has lavished on us: he lets us be called God’s children! For that is what we are. The reason why the world does not know us is that it has not learned to know him.
1JO 3:2 Dear friends, we are God’s children now, and what we will be has not yet been revealed. What we do know is that, when it is revealed, we will be like him, because we will see him as he is.
1JO 3:3 And just as he is pure, everyone who has this hope, makes and keeps themselves pure.
1JO 3:4 Everyone who lives sinfully is living in violation of God’s law. Sin is lawlessness.
1JO 3:5 You know that Christ appeared to take away our sins and that there is no sin in him.
1JO 3:6 No one who lives in him continues to sin; the sinner has not seen or known him.
1JO 3:7 My children, don’t let anyone mislead you. The person who does what is right is righteous, just as Christ is righteous.
1JO 3:8 The person who lives in sin is a child of the devil, for the devil has been sinning from the beginning. To undo the devil’s work is the reason the Son of God appeared.
1JO 3:9 No child of God sins, because God’s nature dwells in them. They can’t live in sin, because they are God’s children.
1JO 3:10 By this it is made clear who are the children of God and who are the devil’s: anyone who doesn’t do what is right or doesn’t love others is not a child of God.
1JO 3:11 For this is the message we heard from the beginning: we are to love one another.
1JO 3:12 We must not be like Cain, who belonged to the evil one and murdered his brother. Why did he kill him? Because his actions were evil, and his brother’s were righteous.
1JO 3:13 Do not be suprised, friends, if the world hates you.
1JO 3:14 We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love each other. The person who does not love remains in a state of death.
1JO 3:15 The person who hates another is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life dwelling within them.
1JO 3:16 This is how we know what love is: Christ gave his life for us. So we should lay down our own lives for each other.
1JO 3:17 If anyone has material possessions, and sees one of our own in need, but closes their heart against that person, how can it be said that the love of God is within them?
1JO 3:18 My children, our love must not be mere words or talk. It must be true and show itself in actions.
1JO 3:19 This is how we will know we belong to the truth and reassure ourselves in God’s presence:
1JO 3:20 though our conscience condemns us, God is greater than our conscience and knows everything.
1JO 3:21 Dear friends, if our conscience does not condemn us, then we approach God with confidence,
1JO 3:22 and we receive from him whatever we ask, because we are keeping his commands, and are doing what pleases him.
1JO 3:23 His command is that we should believe in his Son, Jesus Christ, and love one another, as Christ commanded us.
1JO 3:24 The person who keeps his commands dwells in God and God dwells in them. And we are sure he lives in us because of the Spirit he has given us.
1JO 4:1 Dear friends, do not trust every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether they are from God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
1JO 4:2 This is the way to recognise the Spirit of God: those who acknowledge Jesus Christ as come in the flesh have God’s Spirit,
1JO 4:3 while a spirit that doesn’t acknowledge Jesus isn’t from God. Instead it is the spirit of the antichrist; you have heard that it was coming, and it is now already in the world!
1JO 4:4 You, my children, come from God, and you have successfully resisted such people as these, because he who is in you is greater than the one who is in the world.
1JO 4:5 Those people belong to the world and therefore they speak as the world speaks, and the world listens to them.
1JO 4:6 We come from God. Whoever knows God listens to us; the person who does not come from God does not listen to us. This is how we distinguish the spirit of truth and the spirit of deception.
1JO 4:7 Dear friends, let us love one another, because love comes from God and everyone who loves is a child of God and knows God.
1JO 4:8 Those who do not love know nothing of God, for God is love.
1JO 4:9 This is how God showed his love among us: he sent his one and only Son into the world that we might live through him.
1JO 4:10 This is what love is: it is not that we have loved God, but that he loved us and sent his Son to be an atoning sacrifice for our sins.
1JO 4:11 Dear friends, since God loved us in this way, we should love one another.
1JO 4:12 No one has ever seen God, but if we love one another, God lives in us and his love reaches perfection within us.
1JO 4:13 We know that we live in him, and he lives in us, because he has given us a measure of his Spirit.
1JO 4:14 Moreover, we have seen for ourselves and testify that the Father has sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world.
1JO 4:15 Whoever acknowledges that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, God lives in them, and they live in God.
1JO 4:16 And so we have come to know and believe the love which God has for us. God is love; and whoever lives in love lives in God, and God lives in them.
1JO 4:17 This is the way love has reached its perfection among us, so that we may have confidence on the day of judgment, because in this world we are like Christ.
1JO 4:18 There is no fear in love; perfect love drives out fear because fear has to do with punishment. So anyone who is afraid has not reached perfection in love.
1JO 4:19 We love, because God first loved us.
1JO 4:20 If someone says “I love God,” and yet hates others, they are a liar. For the person who does not love their brother or sister, whom they have seen, cannot love God, whom they have not seen.
1JO 4:21 Indeed, we have this command from Christ: Those who love God must also love each other.
1JO 5:1 Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ is a child of God, and everyone who loves a parent loves his child.
1JO 5:2 By this we know that we love God’s children – when we love God and carry out his commands.
1JO 5:3 For to love God is to do what he commands and his commands are not a burden,
1JO 5:4 for whatever is born of God overcomes the world. What is the victory by which the world is overcome? Our faith!
1JO 5:5 Who can overcome the world but the person who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?
1JO 5:6 Jesus Christ, the one who came by water and blood – not by water only but by water and blood – and the Spirit testifies to this because the Spirit is truth.
1JO 5:7 Indeed three testify:
1JO 5:8 the Spirit, the water, and the blood, and these three agree.
1JO 5:9 We accept human testimony, surely God’s testimony is even stronger! And God’s testimony is the testimony he has given about his Son.
1JO 5:10 The person who believes in the Son of God has that testimony within them. The person who does not believe God has made God a liar, by not believing the testimony God has given about his Son.
1JO 5:11 And this is that testimony: God gave us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.
1JO 5:12 Whoever has the Son has life; whoever who doesn’t have God’s Son does not have life.
1JO 5:13 I have written these things to you who believe in the name of God’s Son, so that you may know that you have eternal life.
1JO 5:14 We can approach him with this confidence, that whenever we ask anything that is in accordance with his will, he listens to us.
1JO 5:15 And if we know he hears us – whatever we ask – we know also that what we ask for is ours.
1JO 5:16 If anyone sees one of our people committing some sin that is not a sin leading to death, they should ask, and God will give them life. I refer to those whose sin does not lead to death. There is a sin that leads to death. I am not saying that you should pray about that.
1JO 5:17 All wrongdoing is sin, but there is sin that does not lead to death.
1JO 5:18 We know that those who have been born of God do not keep sinning. God protects his children and the evil one cannot get hold of them.
1JO 5:19 We know that we are God’s children, though the whole world lies in the power of the evil one.
1JO 5:20 We also know that the Son of God has come and has given us understanding, so that we may know the true God – and we are in him who is true, by being in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life.
1JO 5:21 My children, guard yourselves against false ideas of God.
2JO 1:1 From the elder, to the lady chosen by God and her children. I truly love you all, and I am not the only one but all who know the truth love you as well.
2JO 1:2 We love you for the sake of the truth, which lives in us and will be with us forever.
2JO 1:3 Grace, mercy, and peace will be ours – the gift of God, the Father, and of Jesus Christ, the Father’s Son – in truth and love.
2JO 1:4 It was a great joy to me to find the lives of some of your children guided by the truth, in obedience to the command that we received from the Father.
2JO 1:5 And now I implore you, dear lady, let us love one another This is not a new command I am writing to you. It is the command we have had from the beginning. – Let us love one another.
2JO 1:6 And this is love – to live in obedience to the Father’s commands. This is the command as you learned from the beginning, to live a life of love.
2JO 1:7 I say this because many deceivers have gone out into the world – men who do not acknowledge that Jesus Christ came in flesh and blood. Any such person is a deceiver and antichrist.
2JO 1:8 Take care so that you do not what we have worked for but instead receive your full reward.
2JO 1:9 Anyone who goes beyond and fails to live inside of the teaching of Christ does not have God. The person who lives inside that teaching – they have both the Father and the Son.
2JO 1:10 If anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not receive them into your house or even welcome them;
2JO 1:11 because the person who welcomes them is sharing with them in his evil work.
2JO 1:12 Though I have many other things to tell you, I would rather not use paper and ink. Instead I hope to come and see you, and to speak with you face to face, so that our joy may be complete.
2JO 1:13 The children of your sister, who is chosen by God, send you their greetings.
3JO 1:1 From the elder to his dear friend Gaius, whom he sincerely loves.
3JO 1:2 Dear friend, I pray that all may be well with you and that you may have good health – I know that all is well with your soul.
3JO 1:3 For it was a great joy to me, when some followers of the Lord came and testified to your fidelity to the truth. I know that your own life is guided by the truth.
3JO 1:4 Nothing gives me greater pleasure than to hear from time to time that the lives of my children are guided by the truth.
3JO 1:5 Dear friend, you are faithful in all the things you do for other followers – even when they are strangers to you.
3JO 1:6 They themselves have testified before the church to your love. You will do well to help them on their way in a manner worthy of the service of God.
3JO 1:7 For it was on behalf of Christ’s name that they set out, not accepting even one thing from the Gentiles.
3JO 1:8 Therefore, we should support people like them, and so take our share in their work for the truth.
3JO 1:9 I wrote something to the church, but Diotrephes (who loves to be the leader among them) doesn’t welcome us.
3JO 1:10 So if I come, I will bring up his actions in telling wicked nonsense about us. Not content with that, he not only refuses to personally welcome our friends who are followers, but actually stops those who would, and expels them from the church.
3JO 1:11 Dear friend, do not follow a bad example, but a good one. The person who does what is good is from God; the person who does what is bad has never seen God.
3JO 1:12 Everyone has always had a good word for Demetrius, and the truth itself speaks for him. Yes, and we also add our good word, and you know that what we say is true.
3JO 1:13 I have many things to tell you, but I would rather not use pen and ink.
3JO 1:14 I hope to see you soon, and then we will speak face to face.
3JO 1:15 Peace be with you. The friends here send you their greetings. Greet each one of our friends.
JUD 1:1 To those who, having received the call, have been loved by God the Father and protected by Jesus Christ, From Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ, and the brother of James.
JUD 1:2 May mercy, peace, and love be yours in ever increasing measure.
JUD 1:3 Dear friends, while I was making every effort to write to you about our common salvation, I felt that I must write to you at once to encourage you to fight in defence of the faith that has once for all been entrusted to the keeping of Christ’s people.
JUD 1:4 For there have crept in among you certain godless people, whose sentence has long since been pronounced, and who make the mercy of God an excuse for profligacy, and disown our only lord and master, Jesus Christ.
JUD 1:5 Now I want to remind you – but you already know it all – that, though the Lord delivered the people from Egypt, yet he afterwards destroyed those who refused to believe in him;
JUD 1:6 and that even those angels, who did not keep to their appointed spheres, but left their proper homes, have been kept by him for the judgment of the great day in everlasting chains and black darkness.
JUD 1:7 Like Sodom and Gomorrah and the towns near them, which gave themselves up to fornication, and fell into unnatural vice, these angels now stand out as a warning, undergoing, as they are, punishment in eternal fire.
JUD 1:8 Yet in the same way these people, too, cherishing vain dreams, pollute our human nature, reject control, and malign the celestial beings.
JUD 1:9 Yet even Michael, the archangel, when, in his dispute with the devil, he was arguing about the body of Moses, did not venture to charge him with maligning, but said merely “The Lord rebuke you!”
JUD 1:10 But these people malign whatever they do not understand; while they use such things as they know by instinct (like the animals that have no reason) for their own corruption.
JUD 1:11 Alas for them! They walk in the steps of Cain; led astray by Balaam’s love of gain, they plunge into sin, and meet their ruin through rebellion like Korah.
JUD 1:12 These are the people who are blots on your “love-feasts,” when they feast together and provide without scruple for themselves alone. They are clouds without rain, driven before the winds; they are leafless trees without a vestige of fruit, dead through and through, torn up by the roots;
JUD 1:13 they are wild sea waves, foaming with their own shame; they are “wandering stars,” for which the blackest darkness has been reserved for ever.
JUD 1:14 To these people, as to others, Enoch, the seventh in descent from Adam, declared – “See! The Lord has come with his hosts of holy ones around him,
JUD 1:15 to execute judgment on all people, and to convict all godless people of all their godless acts, which in their ungodliness they have committed, and of all the harsh words which they have spoken against him, godless sinners that they are!”
JUD 1:16 These people are always murmuring, and complaining of their lot; they follow where their passions lead them; they have arrogant words on their lips; and they flatter others for the sake of what they can get from them.
JUD 1:17 But you should, dear friends, recall what was foretold by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ;
JUD 1:18 how they used to say to you – “As time draws to an end, there will be scoffers, who will be led by their godless passions.”
JUD 1:19 These are the people – animal and unspiritual – who cause divisions.
JUD 1:20 But you must, dear friends, build up your characters on the foundation of your most holy faith, pray under the guidance of the Holy Spirit,
JUD 1:21 and keep within the love of God, while waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, to bring you to eternal life.
JUD 1:22 To some show pity, because they are in doubt. “Drag them out of the fire,” and save them.
JUD 1:23 To others show pity, but with caution, hating the clothing polluted by their touch.
JUD 1:24 To him who is able to guard you from falling, and to bring you into his glorious presence, blameless and rejoicing –
JUD 1:25 to the one God, our Saviour, be ascribed, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, glory, majesty, power, and dominion, as it was before time began, is now, and will be for all time to come. Amen.
REV 1:1 The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him to make known to his servants, concerning what must shortly take place, and which he sent and revealed by his angel to his servant John,
REV 1:2 who testified to the message of God and to the testimony to Jesus Christ, omitting nothing of what he had seen.
REV 1:3 Blessed is the one who reads, and blessed are they who listen to, the words of this prophecy, and lay to heart what is here written; for the time is near.
REV 1:4 From John, to the seven churches which are in Roman Asia. Blessing and peace be yours from him who is, and who was, and who will be, and from the seven spirits that are before his throne,
REV 1:5 and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn from the dead, and the Ruler of all the kings of the earth. To him who loves us and freed us from our sins by his own blood –
REV 1:6 and he made us a kingdom of priests in the service of God, his Father! – to him be ascribed glory and dominion for ever. Amen.
REV 1:7 He is coming among the clouds! Every eye will see him, even those who pierced him and all the nations of the earth will mourn over him. So will it be. Amen.
REV 1:8 “I am the Alpha and the Omega,” says the Lord, the God who is, and who was, and who will be, the Almighty.
REV 1:9 I, John, who am your brother, and who share with you in the suffering and kingship and endurance of Jesus, found myself on the island called Patmos, for the sake of the message of God and the testimony to Jesus.
REV 1:10 I fell into a trance on the Lord’s day, and I heard behind me a loud voice, like the blast of a trumpet.
REV 1:11 It said – “Write what you see in a book and send it to the seven churches, to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea.”
REV 1:12 I turned to see what voice it was that spoke to me; and when I turned, I saw seven golden lamps,
REV 1:13 and in the midst of the lamps one like a man, in a robe reaching to his feet, and with a golden sash across his breast.
REV 1:14 The hair of his head was as white as wool, as white as snow; his eyes were like flaming fire;
REV 1:15 and his feet were like brass as when molten in a furnace; his voice was like the sound of many streams,
REV 1:16 in his right hand he held seven stars, from his mouth came a sharp two-edged sword, and his face was like the sun in the fulness of its power.
REV 1:17 And, when I saw him, I fell at his feet like one dead. He laid his hand on me and said – “Do not be afraid. I am the First and the Last,
REV 1:18 the Everliving. I died, and I am alive for ever and ever. And I hold the keys of death and of Hades.
REV 1:19 Therefore write of what you have seen and of what is happening now and of what is about to take place –
REV 1:20 the mystic meaning of the seven stars which you saw in my right hand, and the seven golden lamps. The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lamps are the seven churches.
REV 2:1 ‘To the angel of the church in Ephesus write These are the words of him who holds the seven stars in his right hand, and walks among the seven golden lamps:
REV 2:2 I know your life, your toil and endurance, and I know that you cannot tolerate evildoers. I know, too, how you tested those who declare that they are apostles, though they are not, and how you proved them false.
REV 2:3 You possess endurance, and have borne much for my name, and have never grown weary.
REV 2:4 But this I have against you – You have abandoned your first love.
REV 2:5 Therefore remember from what you have fallen, and repent, and live the life that you lived before; or else, I will come and remove your Lamp from its place, unless you repent.
REV 2:6 But this is in your favour – You hate the life lived by the Nikolaitans, and I also hate it.
REV 2:7 Anyone with ears should hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches. To him who conquers – to him I will give the right to eat the fruit of the Tree of life, which stands in the Paradise of God.
REV 2:8 ‘To the angel of the church in Smyrna write: These are the words of him who is the First and the Last, who died, but is restored to life:
REV 2:9 I know your persecution and your poverty – yet you are rich! I know, too, the slander that comes from those who declare that they are God’s people, though they are not, but are a congregation of Satan.
REV 2:10 Do not be afraid of what you are about to suffer. The devil is about to throw some of you into prison so that you may be tempted, and may undergo persecution for ten days. Be faithful even to death, and I will give you the Crown of life.
REV 2:11 Let those who have ears hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches. Those who conquer will suffer no hurt from the Second Death.
REV 2:12 ‘To the angel of the church in Pergamus write: These are the words of him who holds the sharp two-edged sword:
REV 2:13 I know where you live, where the throne of Satan stands. And yet you hold to my name, and you did not disown my faith even in the days of Antipas, my faithful witness, who was put to death among you where Satan dwells.
REV 2:14 Yet I have a few things against you – You have among you those who hold to the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to put temptations in the way of the Israelites, so that they should eat idol-offerings and commit licentious acts.
REV 2:15 Again you have among you those who hold in the same way to the teaching of the Nikolaitans.
REV 2:16 Therefore repent, or else, I will come quickly and contend with such people with words that will cut like a sword.
REV 2:17 Let those who have ears hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches. To those who conquer – to them I will give a share of the mystic manna, and I will give them a white stone; and on the stone will be inscribed a new name, which no one knows except the person who receives it.
REV 2:18 ‘To the angel of the church in Thyatira write: These are the words of the Son of God, whose eyes are like flaming fire, and whose feet are like brass:
REV 2:19 I know your life, your love, faith, service, and endurance; and I know that your life of late has been better than it was at first.
REV 2:20 Yet I have this against you – You tolerate the woman Jezebel, who declares that she is a prophet, and misleads my servants by her teaching, until they commit licentious acts and eat idol-offerings.
REV 2:21 I gave her time to repent, but she is determined not to turn from her licentiousness.
REV 2:22 Therefore I am laying her on a bed of sickness, and bringing great suffering on those who are unfaithful with her, unless they repent and turn from a life like hers.
REV 2:23 I will also put her children to death; and all the churches will learn that I am he who looks into people’s hearts and souls; and I will give to each one of you what their life deserves.
REV 2:24 But I say to the rest of you at Thyatira – all who do not accept such teaching, whose who did not learn the secrets of Satan, as people call them – I am not laying on you any further burden;
REV 2:25 only hold fast to what you have received, until I come.
REV 2:26 To those who conquer and are careful to live my life to the end – to them I will give authority over the nations,
REV 2:27 and they will rule them with an iron rod, as when earthen vessels are broken in pieces (as I myself have received from my Father)
REV 2:28 and I will give them the morning star.
REV 2:29 Let those who have ears hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches.
REV 3:1 ‘To the angel of the church in Sardis write: These are the words of him who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars; – I know your life, and that people say of you that you are living, though you are dead.
REV 3:2 Be on the watch, and strengthen what still survives, though once it was all but dead; for I have not found your life perfect in the eyes of my God.
REV 3:3 Therefore remember what you have received and heard, and lay it to heart and repent. Unless you are on the watch, I will come like a thief, and you will not know at what hour I am coming to you.
REV 3:4 Yet there are some few among you at Sardis who did not soil their robes; they will walk with me, robed in white, for they are worthy.
REV 3:5 Those who conquer will be clothed in these white robes, and I will not strike their name out of the book of life; but I will own them before my Father, and before his angels.
REV 3:6 Let those who have ears hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches.
REV 3:7 ‘To the angel of the church in Philadelphia write: These are the words of him who is holy and true, who holds the Key of David, who opens and no one will shut, and shuts and no one opens:
REV 3:8 I know your life (see, I have set a door open before you which no one is able to shut), I know that, though you have but little strength, you kept my teaching in mind, and did not disown my name.
REV 3:9 Listen, I give some of the congregation of Satan, the people who declare that they are God’s people, though they are not, but are lying – I will make them come and bow down at your feet, and they will learn that I loved you.
REV 3:10 Because you kept in mind the story of my endurance, I will keep you in the hour of trial that is about to come on the whole world, the hour that will test all who are living on earth.
REV 3:11 I will come quickly. Hold to what you have received so that no one may take your crown.
REV 3:12 Those who conquer – I will make them a pillar in the Temple of my God; and never more will they leave it; and I will write on them the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the New Jerusalem, which is coming down out of heaven from my God, and I will write on them my new name.
REV 3:13 Let those who have ears hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches.
REV 3:14 ‘To the angel of the church in Laodicea write: These are the words of the Unchanging One, the witness faithful and true, the beginning of the Creation of God:
REV 3:15 I know your life; I know that you are neither cold nor hot. If only you were either cold or hot!
REV 3:16 But now, because you are lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, I am about to spit you out of my mouth.
REV 3:17 You say “I am rich and have grown rich, and I want for nothing,” and you do not know that you are wretched, miserable, poor, blind, naked!
REV 3:18 Therefore I counsel you to buy from me gold which has been refined by fire so that you may grow rich; and white robes, so that you may be clothed and your shameful nakedness be hidden; and ointment to anoint your eyes, so that you may see.
REV 3:19 All whom I love I rebuke and discipline. Therefore be in earnest and repent.
REV 3:20 I am standing at the door and knocking! If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will go in, and will feast with them, and they will feast with me.
REV 3:21 To those who conquer – to them I will give the right to sit beside me on my throne, as I, when I conquered, took my seat beside my Father on his throne.
REV 3:22 Let those who have ears hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches.’
REV 4:1 After this, in my vision, I saw an open door in the heavens, and the first voice that I heard was like the blast of a trumpet speaking to me. It said – “Come up here and I will show you what must take place.”
REV 4:2 Immediately after this I fell into a trance. There stood a throne in heaven, and on the throne was One seated.
REV 4:3 He who was seated on it was in appearance like a jasper and a sardius; and round the throne there was a rainbow of the colour of an emerald.
REV 4:4 And round the throne were twenty-four other thrones, and on these I saw twenty-four elders sitting clothed in white robes; and on their heads they had crowns of gold.
REV 4:5 Out from the throne come flashes of lightning, cries, and peals of thunder! There are seven torches burning in front of the throne, which are the seven spirits of God;
REV 4:6 and in front of the throne is what seemed to be a sea of glass, resembling crystal, while within the space before the throne and round the throne are four creatures full of eyes in front and behind.
REV 4:7 The first creature is like a lion, the second creature like a calf, the third creature has a face like a man’s, and the fourth creature is like an eagle on the wing.
REV 4:8 These four creatures have each of them six wings, and all round, and within, they are full of eyes; and day and night they never cease to say – “Holy, holy, holy is the Lord, our God, the Almighty, who was, and who is, and who will be.”
REV 4:9 And, whenever these creatures give praise and honour and thanks to him who is seated on the throne, to him who lives for ever and ever,
REV 4:10 the twenty-four elders prostrate themselves before him who is seated on the throne, and worship him who lives for ever and ever, and throw down their crowns before the throne, saying –
REV 4:11 “Worthy are you, our Lord and God, to receive all praise, and honour, and power, for you did create all things, and at your bidding they came into being and were created.”
REV 5:1 Then I saw at the right hand of him who was seated on the throne a book, with writing inside and out, and sealed with seven seals;
REV 5:2 and I saw a mighty angel who was proclaiming in a loud voice – “Who is worthy to open the book and break its seals?”
REV 5:3 But no one either in heaven or on earth or under the earth was able to open the book or look within it.
REV 5:4 At this I wept long, because no one could be found who was worthy to open the book or look within it.
REV 5:5 But one of the elders said to me – “Do not weep. The Lion conquered – the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Scion of David – and can therefore open the book with its seven seals.”
REV 5:6 Then, within the space between the throne and the four creatures, and in the midst of the elders, I saw, standing, a Lamb, which seemed to have been sacrificed. It had seven horns and seven eyes. (These eyes are the seven spirits of God, and they are sent into all the world.)
REV 5:7 The Lamb came forward; and he has taken the book from the right hand of him who was seated on the throne.
REV 5:8 And, when he had taken the book, the four creatures and the twenty-four elders prostrated themselves before the Lamb, each of them holding a harp and golden bowls full of incense. (These are the prayers of Christ’s people.)
REV 5:9 And they are singing a new song – “You are worthy to take the book and break its seals, for you were sacrificed, and with your blood you did buy for God people of every tribe, and language, and people, and nation,
REV 5:10 and did make them a kingdom of priests in the service of our God, and they are reigning on the earth.”
REV 5:11 Then, in my vision, I heard the voices of many angels round the throne, and of the creatures, and of the elders. In number they were ten thousand times ten thousand and thousands of thousands,
REV 5:12 and they cried in a loud voice – “Worthy is the Lamb that was sacrificed to receive all power, and wealth, and wisdom, and might, and honour, and praise, and blessing.”
REV 5:13 And I heard every created thing in the air, and on the earth, and under the earth, and on the sea, and all that is in them crying – “To him who is seated on the throne and to the Lamb be ascribed all blessing, and honour, and praise, and dominion for ever and ever.”
REV 5:14 And the four creatures said “Amen,” and the elders prostrated themselves and worshiped.
REV 6:1 Then I saw the Lamb break one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four creatures crying with a voice like thunder – “Come.”
REV 6:2 And in my vision I saw a white horse. Its rider held a bow, and he was given a crown, and he went out conquering and to conquer.
REV 6:3 When the Lamb broke the second seal, I heard the second creature crying – “Come.”
REV 6:4 Then there went out another horse, a red horse, and to its rider was given the power to deprive the earth of peace, so that people should kill one another; and he was given a great sword.
REV 6:5 When the Lamb broke the third seal, I heard the third creature crying – “Come.” And in my vision I saw a black horse. Its rider held scales in his hand.
REV 6:6 And I heard what seemed to be a voice, coming from among the four creatures, crying – “A quart of wheat for a silver coin, and three quarts of barley for a silver coin! But do not harm the oil and the wine.”
REV 6:7 When the Lamb broke the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth creature crying – “Come.”
REV 6:8 And in my vision I saw a grey horse. His rider’s name was Death, and Hades rode behind him; and power was given them over the fourth part of the earth, so that they might destroy with sword and famine and death, and by means of the wild Beasts of the earth.
REV 6:9 When the Lamb opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been killed for the sake of God’s message and for the testimony which they had borne.
REV 6:10 They cried in a loud voice – “How long, Sovereign Lord, holy and true, before you will give judgment and avenge our blood on all who are living on the earth?”
REV 6:11 Then to each of them was given a white robe, and they were told to rest yet a little longer, until the number of their fellow servants and of their friends in Christ’s service who were about to be put to death, as they had been, should be complete.
REV 6:12 And I saw the Lamb break the sixth seal, and then there was a great earthquake. The sun became black, like sackcloth, and the moon, which was at its full, like blood.
REV 6:13 The stars of the heavens fell to the earth, as when a fig tree, shaken by a strong wind, drops its unripe fruit.
REV 6:14 The heavens disappeared like a scroll when it is rolled up, and every mountain and island was moved from its place.
REV 6:15 Then all the kings of the earth, and the princes, and the generals, and the rich, and the powerful, and every slave and free person, hid themselves in the caves and under the rocks of the mountains;
REV 6:16 and they are crying to the mountains and the rocks – “Fall on us, and hide us from the eyes of him who is seated on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb,
REV 6:17 for the great day of their wrath is come, and who can stand to meet it?”
REV 7:1 After this, I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the earth, restraining the four winds of the earth, so that no wind should blow over the earth, or over the sea, or against any tree.
REV 7:2 And, in the east, I saw another angel, ascending, holding the seal of the living God; and he cried in a loud voice to the four angels, to whom there had been given power to harm the earth and the sea –
REV 7:3 “Do not harm the earth, or the sea, or the trees, until we have sealed the servants of our God on their foreheads.”
REV 7:4 I heard, too, the number of those who had been sealed. It was one hundred and forty-four thousand; and they were from every tribe of the Israelites.
REV 7:5 From the tribe of Judah twelve thousand were sealed, from the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand, from the tribe of Gad twelve thousand,
REV 7:6 from the tribe of Asher twelve thousand, from the tribe of Napthali twelve thousand, from the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand,
REV 7:7 from the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand, from the tribe of Levi twelve thousand, from the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand,
REV 7:8 from the tribe of Zebulon twelve thousand, from the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand, from the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand were sealed.
REV 7:9 After this, in my vision, I saw a vast throng which no one could number, of people from every nation and of all tribes, and peoples, and languages. They stood in front of the throne and in front of the Lamb, robed in white, holding palm branches in their hands.
REV 7:10 And they are crying in a loud voice – “Salvation be ascribed to our God who is seated on his throne and to the Lamb.”
REV 7:11 And all the angels were standing round the throne and the elders and the four creatures, and they prostrated themselves on their faces in front of the throne and worshiped God,
REV 7:12 saying – “Amen. Blessing and praise, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might be ascribed to our God for ever and ever. Amen.”
REV 7:13 Then one of the elders turned to me and said “Who are these who are robed in white? And where did they come from?”
REV 7:14 “My Lord,” I answered, “it is you who know.” “These,” he said, “are they who come through the Great Persecution; they washed their robes white in the blood of the Lamb.
REV 7:15 And therefore it is that they are before the throne of God, and are serving him day and night in his Temple; and he who is seated on the throne will shelter them.
REV 7:16 Never again will they be hungry, never again will they be thirsty, nor will the sun smite them, nor any scorching heat;
REV 7:17 for the Lamb that stands in the space before the throne will be their shepherd, and will lead them to life-giving springs of water; and God will wipe away all tears from their eyes.”
REV 8:1 As soon as the Lamb had broken the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for, it might be, half an hour.
REV 8:2 Then I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
REV 8:3 Next, another angel came and stood at the altar with a golden censer in his hand; and a great quantity of incense was given to him, to mingle with the prayers of all Christ’s people on the golden altar before the throne.
REV 8:4 The smoke of the incense ascended, with the prayers of Christ’s people, from the hand of the angel before God.
REV 8:5 Then the angel took the censer, and filled it with fire from the altar, and threw it down on the earth; and there followed peals of thunder, cries, flashes of lightning, and an earthquake.
REV 8:6 Then the seven angels holding the seven trumpets prepared to blow their blasts.
REV 8:7 The first blew; and there came hail and fire mixed with blood, and it fell on the earth. A third part of the earth was burnt up, and a third of the trees, and every blade of grass.
REV 8:8 Then the second angel blew; and what appeared to be a great mountain, burning, was hurled into the sea. A third of the sea became blood,
REV 8:9 and a third part of all created things that are in the sea – that is, of all living things – died, and a third of the ships was destroyed.
REV 8:10 Then the third angel blew; and there fell from the heavens a great star, burning like a torch. It fell on a third of the rivers and on the springs.
REV 8:11 (The star is called “Wormwood.”) A third of the water became bitter as wormwood, and so bitter was the water that many died from drinking it.
REV 8:12 Then the fourth angel blew; and a third of the sun and a third of the moon and a third of the stars were blasted, so that a third of them was eclipsed, and for a third part of the day there was no light, and at night it was the same.
REV 8:13 And, in my vision, I heard an eagle flying in mid-heaven and crying in a loud voice – “Woe, woe, woe for all who live on the earth, at the other trumpet-blasts of the three angels who have yet to blow.”
REV 9:1 Then the fifth angel blew; and I saw a star that had fallen on the earth from the heavens, and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit.
REV 9:2 He opened the bottomless pit, and from the pit rose a smoke like the smoke of a great furnace. The sun and the air grew dark because of the smoke from the pit.
REV 9:3 Out of the smoke locusts descended on the earth, and they received the same power as that possessed by scorpions.
REV 9:4 They were told not to harm the grass, or any plant, or any tree, but only those who have not the seal of God on their foreheads.
REV 9:5 Yet they were not allowed to kill them, but it was ordered that those men should be tortured for five months. Their torture was like the torture caused by a scorpion when it stings a person.
REV 9:6 In those days people will seek Death and will not find it; They will long to die, but Death flees from them.
REV 9:7 In appearance the locusts were like horses equipped for battle. On their heads there were what appeared to be crowns that shone like gold, their faces resembled human faces,
REV 9:8 and they had hair like the hair of a woman, their teeth were like lions’ teeth,
REV 9:9 and they had what seemed to be iron breastplates, while the noise of their wings was like the noise of chariots drawn by many horses, galloping into battle.
REV 9:10 They have tails like scorpions, and stings, and in their tails lies their power to harm people for five months.
REV 9:11 They have as their king the angel of the bottomless pit, whose name, in Hebrew, is “Abaddon,” while, in Greek, his name is “Apollyon” (the Destroyer).
REV 9:12 The first Woe has passed; and still there are two Woes to follow!
REV 9:13 Then the sixth angel blew; and I heard a voice proceeding from the corners of the golden altar that stood before God.
REV 9:14 It spoke to the sixth angel – the angel with the trumpet – and said “Let loose the four angels that are in chains at the great river Euphrates.”
REV 9:15 Then the four angels, that were held in readiness for that hour and day and month and year, were let loose, to destroy a third of mankind.
REV 9:16 The number of the hosts of cavalry was ten thousand times ten thousand, twice told; I heard their number.
REV 9:17 And this is what the horses and their riders appeared to be like in my vision: They had breastplates of fire, blood-red and sulphurous, and the heads of the horses were like lions’ heads, while out of their mouths issue fire, and smoke, and sulphur.
REV 9:18 Through these three curses a third of humanity perished – because of the fire, and the smoke, and the sulphur that issued from their mouths;
REV 9:19 for the power of the horses lies in their mouths and in their tails. For their tails are like snakes, with heads, and it is with them that they do harm.
REV 9:20 But those who were left of humanity, who had not perished through these curses, did not repent and turn away from what their own hands had made; they would not abandon the worship of demons, and of idols made of gold or silver or brass or stone or wood, which can neither see, nor hear, nor walk;
REV 9:21 and they did not repent of their murders, or their sorceries, or their licentiousness, or their thefts.
REV 10:1 Then I saw another mighty angel, descending from heaven. His robe was a cloud; over his head was the rainbow; his face was like the sun, and his feet like pillars of fire;
REV 10:2 in his hand he held a little book open. He set his right foot on the sea, and his left on the land;
REV 10:3 and he cried in a loud voice like the roaring of a lion. At his cry the seven peals of thunder spoke, each with its own voice.
REV 10:4 And, when they spoke, I was about to write; but I heard a voice from heaven say – “Keep secret what the seven peals of thunder said, and do not write it down.”
REV 10:5 Then the angel, whom I had seen standing on the sea and on the land, raised his right hand to the heavens,
REV 10:6 and swore by him who lives for ever and ever, who created the heavens and all that is in them, and the earth and all that is in it, and the sea and all that is in it, that time should cease to be.
REV 10:7 Moreover at the time when the seventh angel will speak, when he is ready to blow his blast, then the hidden purposes of God, of which he told the good news to his servants, the prophets, are at once fulfilled.
REV 10:8 Then came the voice which I had heard from heaven. It spoke to me again, and said – “Go and take the book that is open in the hand of the angel who stands on the sea and on the land.”
REV 10:9 So I went to the angel and asked him to give me the little book. And he said “Take it, and eat it. It will be bitter to your stomach, but in your mouth it will be as sweet as honey.”
REV 10:10 I took the little book out of the angel’s hand and ate it, and, while in my mouth, it was like the sweetest honey; but, when I had eaten it, it was bitter to my stomach.
REV 10:11 And I was told – “You must prophesy again about men of many peoples, and nations, and languages, and about many kings.”
REV 11:1 Then I was given a measure like a rod, and a voice said to me – “Go and measure the Temple of God and the altar, and count the worshiper there.
REV 11:2 But omit the court outside the Temple, and do not measure that, for it has been given up to the nations; and the holy City will be under their heel for forty-two months.
REV 11:3 Then I will give permission to my Two Witnesses, and for those twelve hundred and sixty days they will continue teaching, clothed in sackcloth.”
REV 11:4 These men are represented by the two olive trees and the two lamps that stand before the Lord of the earth.
REV 11:5 When anyone wishes to harm them, fire comes from their mouths and consumes their enemies; and whoever wishes to harm them will, in this way, inevitably perish.
REV 11:6 These men have the power to close the heavens, so that no rain may fall during the time that they are teaching; and they have power to turn the streams into blood, and to smite the land with any curse, whenever they will.
REV 11:7 As soon as they have completed their testimony, the wild Beast that ascends from the bottomless pit will make war on them and conquer and kill them.
REV 11:8 Their dead bodies will lie in the streets of the great city, which is mystically spoken of as “Sodom” and “Egypt,” where their Master was crucified.
REV 11:9 People of all nations, and tribes, and languages, and races look at their dead bodies for three days and a half, and do not allow them to be laid in a grave.
REV 11:10 Those who live on the earth rejoice over them and are merry, and they will send presents to one another, because these two prophets brought torments on those who live on the earth.
REV 11:11 After three days and a half the life-giving breath of God entered these men, and they stood up on their feet, and a great terror took possession of those who were watching them.
REV 11:12 The two men heard a loud voice from heaven which said to them – “Come up here,” and they went up to heaven in the cloud, while their enemies watched them.
REV 11:13 At that very time a great earthquake occurred. A tenth part of the city fell, and seven thousand people perished in the earthquake. Those who escaped were much terrified, and praised the God of heaven.
REV 11:14 The second Woe has passed; and there is a third Woe soon to follow!
REV 11:15 Then the seventh angel blew; and loud voices were heard in heaven saying – “The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will reign for ever and ever.”
REV 11:16 At this the twenty-four elders, who were seated on their thrones before God, prostrated themselves on their faces and worshiped him,
REV 11:17 saying – “We thank you, Lord, our God, the Almighty, who is and who was, that you have assumed your great power and reigned.
REV 11:18 The nations were enraged, and your wrath fell on them; the time came for the dead to be judged, and for you to give the reward to your servants the prophets, and to the people of Christ, and to those who honour your name – the high and the low alike – and to destroy those who are destroying the earth.”
REV 11:19 Then the Temple of God in heaven was opened, and the ark containing his covenant was seen in his Temple; and there followed flashes of lightning, cries, peals of thunder, an earthquake, and a great storm of hail.
REV 12:1 Then a great portent was seen in the heavens – a woman whose robe was the sun, and who had the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars.
REV 12:2 She was pregnant; and she is crying out in the pain and agony of childbirth.
REV 12:3 Another portent also was seen in the heavens There was a great red Dragon, with seven heads and ten horns, and on his heads were seven diadems.
REV 12:4 His tail draws after it a third of the stars in the heavens, and it hurled them down on the earth. The Dragon is standing in front of the woman who is about to give birth to the child, so that he may devour it as soon as it is born.
REV 12:5 The woman gave birth to a son, a male child, who is destined to rule all the nations with an iron rod; and her child was at once caught up to God on his throne.
REV 12:6 But the woman fled into the wilderness, where there is a place prepared for her by God, to be tended there for twelve hundred and sixty days.
REV 12:7 Then a battle took place in the heavens. Michael and his angels fought with the Dragon. But though the Dragon, with his angels, fought,
REV 12:8 he did not prevail; and there was no place left for them any longer in the heavens.
REV 12:9 Then the great Dragon, the primeval snake, known as the “devil” and “Satan,” who deceives all the world, was hurled down to the earth, and his angels were hurled down with him.
REV 12:10 And I heard a loud voice in heaven which said – “Now has begun the day of the salvation, and Power, and Dominion of our God, and the Rule of his Christ; for the Accuser of our people has been hurled down, he who has been accusing them before our God day and night.
REV 12:11 Their victory was due to the blood of the Lamb, and to the message to which they bore their testimony. In their love of life they shrank not from death.
REV 12:12 Therefore, be glad, heaven, and all who live in heaven! Alas for the earth and for the sea, for the devil has gone down to you in great fury, knowing that he has but little time.”
REV 12:13 When the Dragon saw that he was hurled down to the earth, he pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child.
REV 12:14 But to the woman were given the two wings of the great eagle, so that she might fly to her place in the wilderness, where she is being tended for one year, and for two years, and for half a year in safety from the snake.
REV 12:15 Then the snake poured water from its mouth after the woman, like a river, so that it might sweep her away.
REV 12:16 But Earth came to her help, and opened her mouth and drank up the river which the Dragon had poured out of its mouth.
REV 12:17 The Dragon was enraged at the woman, and went to fight with the rest of her offspring – those who lay to heart the commands of God and bear their testimony to Jesus;
REV 12:18 and he took his stand on the sea-shore.
REV 13:1 Then I saw, rising out of the sea, a wild Beast with ten horns and seven heads. On its horns were ten diadems, and on its heads were blasphemous names.
REV 13:2 The Beast that I saw was like a leopard; but its feet were like a bear’s, and its mouth like the mouth of a lion. The Dragon gave it his power and his throne, and wide dominion.
REV 13:3 One of its heads seemed to me to have been mortally wounded, but its deadly wound had been healed. The whole earth followed the Beast, wondering;
REV 13:4 and men worshiped the Dragon, because he had given his dominion to the Beast; while, as they worshiped the Beast, they said – “Who can compare with the Beast? And who can fight with it?”
REV 13:5 The Beast was given a mouth that spoke proudly and blasphemously, and it was empowered to work its will for forty-two months.
REV 13:6 It opened its mouth only to blaspheme God, to blaspheme his name and his tent – those who live in his tent in heaven.
REV 13:7 It had been permitted to fight with Christ’s people and to conquer them, and it had received power over men of every tribe, and people, and language, and nation.
REV 13:8 All who are living on earth will worship it – all whose names have not been written in the Lamb’s book of life, the Lamb that has been sacrificed from the foundation of the world.
REV 13:9 Let those who have ears hear.
REV 13:10 Whoever is destined for captivity goes into captivity. Whoever will kill with the sword must inevitably be killed with the sword. (Here there is need for endurance and faith on the part of Christ’s people.)
REV 13:11 Then I saw, rising out of the earth, another wild Beast. It had two horns like those of a lamb, and its voice was like a dragon’s.
REV 13:12 It exercises all the authority of the first Beast under its eyes; and it makes the earth and all who are living on it worship that first Beast, whose mortal wound was healed.
REV 13:13 It performs great marvels, even causing fire to fall from the heavens to the earth, before people’s eyes;
REV 13:14 and in consequence of the marvels which it was allowed to perform under the eyes of the Beast, it is able to deceive all who are living on the earth. It tells those who live on the earth to make a statue in honour of the Beast, who, despite the wound from the sword, yet lived.
REV 13:15 It was permitted to breathe life into the image of the Beast, so that the image of the Beast might speak; and it was also permitted to cause all who refused to worship the image of the Beast to be put to death.
REV 13:16 High and low, rich and poor, free and enslaved – it causes a brand to be put on the right hand or on the forehead of every one of them,
REV 13:17 so that no one is able to buy or sell, except those that bear this brand – either the name of the Beast or the number indicated by the letters of his name.
REV 13:18 (Here there is need for discernment.) The person with ability can compute the number of the Beast; for the number indicates a person’s name. Its number is six hundred and sixty-six.
REV 14:1 Then, in my vision, I saw the Lamb standing on Mount Zion. With him were a hundred and forty-four thousand, with his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads.
REV 14:2 And I heard a sound from heaven, like the sound of many waters, and like the sound of a loud peal of thunder; the sound that I heard was like the music of harpers playing on their harps.
REV 14:3 They are singing what seems to be a new song, before the throne, and before the four creatures and the elders; and no one was able to learn that song except the hundred and forty-four thousand who had been redeemed from earth.
REV 14:4 These are the men who never defiled themselves in their intercourse with women; they are as pure as virgins. These are the men who follow the Lamb wherever he goes. They were redeemed as the first-fruits of mankind for God and for the Lamb.
REV 14:5 No lie was ever heard on their lips. They are beyond reach of blame.
REV 14:6 Then I saw another angel, flying in mid-heaven. He had the good news, decreed from eternity, to announce to those who live on the earth – to men of every nation, and tribe, and language, and people;
REV 14:7 and he cried in a loud voice – “Reverence God, and give him praise (for the hour of his judgment has come) and worship him who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all springs of water.”
REV 14:8 Then a second angel followed, crying – “She has fallen! She has fallen – Babylon the Great, who has made all the nations drink the maddening wine of her licentiousness!”
REV 14:9 Then a third angel followed them, crying in a loud voice – “Whoever worships the Beast and its image, and receives its brand on his forehead or on his hand,
REV 14:10 that person will drink the maddening wine of God that has been poured unmixed into the cup of his wrath, and they will be tortured with fire and sulphur before the eyes of the holy angels and before the eyes of the Lamb.
REV 14:11 The smoke from their torture rises for ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night – those who worship the Beast and its image, and all who are branded with its name.”
REV 14:12 (Here there is need for endurance on the part of Christ’s people – those who lay to heart the commands of God and the faith of Jesus.)
REV 14:13 Then I heard a voice from heaven saying “Write: ‘Blessed are the dead who from this hour die in union with the Lord.’” ‘Yes,’ answers the Spirit, ‘that they may rest from their toil. Their good deeds go with them.’
REV 14:14 Then, in my vision, I saw a white cloud, and on the cloud there was sitting one like a man. On his head he had a crown of gold, and in his hand a sharp sickle.
REV 14:15 Then another angel came out from the Temple, crying in a loud voice to him who was sitting on the cloud – “Take your sickle and reap, for the time to reap has come; the Harvest of Earth is ready.”
REV 14:16 He who was sitting on the cloud brought his sickle down on the earth, and the Harvest of Earth was reaped.
REV 14:17 Then another angel came out of the Temple in heaven; he, also, had a sharp sickle.
REV 14:18 Then another angel came out of the altar; he had power over fire, and he called in a loud voice to the angel that had the sharp sickle – “Take your sharp sickle, and gather the bunches from the vine of Earth, for its grapes are ripe.”
REV 14:19 The angel brought his sickle down on the earth and gathered the fruit of the vine of Earth, and threw it into the great winepress of the wrath of God.
REV 14:20 The grapes were trodden in the press outside the city; and blood came out of the press, rising as high as the bridles of the horses for a distance of two hundred miles.
REV 15:1 Then I saw another portent in the heavens – a great and marvellous portent – seven angels with the seven last curses; because with them the wrath of God is ended.
REV 15:2 Then I saw what appeared to be a sea of glass mixed with fire; and, standing by this sea of glass, holding the harps of God, I saw those who had come victorious out of the conflict with the Beast and its image and the number that formed its name.
REV 15:3 They are singing the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb – “Great and marvellous are your deeds, Lord, our God, the Almighty. Righteous and true are your ways, eternal King.
REV 15:4 Who will not honour and praise your name, Lord? You alone are holy! All nations will come and worship before you, for your judgments have become manifest.”
REV 15:5 After this I saw that the inmost shrine of the tent of testimony in heaven was opened,
REV 15:6 and out of it came the seven angels with the seven curses. They were adorned with precious stones, pure and bright, and had golden girdles round their breasts.
REV 15:7 One of the four creatures gave the seven angels seven golden bowls, filled with the wrath of God who lives for ever and ever.
REV 15:8 The Temple was filled with smoke from the glory and majesty of God; and no one could enter the Temple, until the seven curses inflicted by the seven angels were at an end.
REV 16:1 Then I heard a loud voice, which came from the Temple, saying to the seven angels – “Go and empty the seven bowls of the wrath of God on the earth.”
REV 16:2 The first angel went and emptied his bowl on the earth; and it turned to loathsome and painful sores on all who bore the brand of the Beast and who worshiped its image.
REV 16:3 Then the second angel emptied his bowl on the sea; and it turned to blood like the blood of a corpse, and every living thing died – everything in the sea.
REV 16:4 Then the third angel emptied his bowl on the rivers and springs of water; and it turned to blood.
REV 16:5 And I heard the angel of the Waters saying – “Righteous are you, you who is and who is, the Holy One, in inflicting this judgment;
REV 16:6 for men shed the blood of Christ’s people and of the prophets, and you have given them blood to drink. It is what they deserve.”
REV 16:7 And I heard the response from the altar – “Yes, Lord, our God, the Almighty, true and righteous are they judgments.”
REV 16:8 Then the fourth angel emptied his bowl on the sun; and he was permitted to scorch men with fire;
REV 16:9 and men were scorched by the intense heat. They blasphemed the name of God who controlled these curses, yet they did not repent and give him praise.
REV 16:10 Then the fifth angel emptied his bowl on the throne of the Beast; and darkness fell on its kingdom. Men gnawed their tongues for pain,
REV 16:11 and blasphemed the God of heaven, because of their pains and because of their sores; yet they did not repent of what they had done.
REV 16:12 Then the sixth angel emptied his bowl on the great river Euphrates; and the water in the river was dried up, so that the road for the kings of the East might be made ready.
REV 16:13 And I saw three foul spirits, like frogs, come from the mouth of the Dragon and from the mouth of the Beast and from the mouth of the false prophet.
REV 16:14 They are the spirits of demons, and perform marvels; they go to kings all over the world, to collect them for the battle on the great day of Almighty God.
REV 16:15 (“I am coming like a thief! Happy will he be who is on the watch, and keeps his clothing at hand, so that he will not have to walk about unclothed and let men see his nakedness.”)
REV 16:16 And the spirits collected the kings at the place called in Hebrew “Har-Magedon.”
REV 16:17 Then the seventh angel emptied his bowl on the air. (A loud voice came from the throne in the Temple; it said “All is over.”)
REV 16:18 There followed flashes of lightning, cries, and peals of thunder; and there was a great earthquake, such as had not occurred since man began to be on the earth – none so great;
REV 16:19 and the great city was torn in three, and the cities of the nation fell, and God remembered Babylon the Great, and gave her the maddening wine-cup of his wrath;
REV 16:20 and every island vanished, and the mountains disappeared.
REV 16:21 Great hailstones, a pound in weight, are falling on men from the heavens. And men blasphemed God because of the curse of the hail, for it was a very terrible curse.
REV 17:1 Then one of the seven angels who held the seven bowls came and spoke to me. “Come here,” he said, “and I will show you the sentence passed on that infamous prostitute who is seated at the meeting of many waters,
REV 17:2 and with whom all the kings of the earth have had licentious intercourse; while all who live on the earth have been make drunk by the wine of her licentiousness.”
REV 17:3 And he bore me away in a trance to a lonely place, and I saw a woman seated on a scarlet Beast, which was covered with blasphemous names; it had seven heads and ten horns.
REV 17:4 The woman was clothed in purple and scarlet, and glittering with gold ornaments, precious stones, and pearls. In her hand she held a gold cup, full of idolatrous abominations, and the unclean fruits of her licentiousness;
REV 17:5 while on her forehead was inscribed a name that had a hidden meaning: “Babylon the Great, mother of all prostitutes, source of all obscenities on earth.”
REV 17:6 And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of Christ’s people and with the blood of the martyrs for Jesus. When I saw her, I was amazed beyond measure;
REV 17:7 but the angel said to me – “Why were you amazed? I will tell you the mystic meaning of the vision of this woman, and of the Beast, with the seven heads and ten horns, that carries her.
REV 17:8 The Beast that you saw was, but is not, and is about to rise out of the bottomless pit, and is on its way to destruction. Those who are living on earth will be amazed – those whose names have not been written in the book of life from the foundation of the world – when they see that the Beast was, but is not, and yet will come.”
REV 17:9 (Here there is need for the discerning mind.) The seven heads are seven mountains on which the woman is seated.
REV 17:10 They are also seven kings; of whom five have fallen and one remains, while one is not yet come. When he comes, he must stay for a little while.
REV 17:11 So must the Beast that was, but is not. He counts as an eighth king, although he is one of the seven, and is on his way to destruction.
REV 17:12 The ten horns that you saw are ten kings, who have not yet received their kingdoms, but for an hour they receive the authority of kings, together with the Beast.
REV 17:13 These kings are of one mind in surrendering their power and authority to the Beast.
REV 17:14 They will fight with the Lamb, but the Lamb will conquer them, for he is Lord of lords and King of kings; so, too, will those with him who have received the call and are chosen and faithful.
REV 17:15 And the angel said to me – “The waters that you saw, where the prostitute is seated, are throngs of people and men of all nations and languages.
REV 17:16 The ten horns that you saw, and the Beast – they will hate the prostitute, and cause her to become deserted and strip her bare; they will eat her flesh and utterly consume her with fire.
REV 17:17 For God has put it into their minds to carry out his purpose, in carrying out their common purpose and surrendering their kingdoms to the Beast, until God’s decrees will be executed.
REV 17:18 As for the woman whom you saw, she is the great city that holds sway over all the kings of the earth.”
REV 18:1 After this I saw another angel, descending from heaven, invested with great authority; and the earth was illuminated by his splendour.
REV 18:2 With a mighty voice he cried – ‘She has fallen! She has fallen – Babylon the Great! She has become an abode of demons, a stronghold of every wicked spirit, a stronghold of every foul and hateful bird.
REV 18:3 For, after drinking the maddening wine of her licentiousness, all the nations have fallen; while all the kings of the earth have had licentious intercourse with her, and the merchants of the earth have grown rich through the excess of her luxury.’
REV 18:4 Then I heard another voice from heaven saying – ‘Come out of her, my people, so that you may not participate in her sins, and that you may not suffer from the curses inflicted on her.
REV 18:5 For her sins are heaped up to the heavens, and God has not forgotten her misdeeds.
REV 18:6 Pay her back the treatment with which she has treated you; yes, repay twice over what her actions deserve; in the cup which she mixed for you, mix for her as much again;
REV 18:7 for her self-glorification and her luxury, give her now an equal measure of torture and misery. In her heart she says “I sit here a queen; no widow am I; I will never know misery.”
REV 18:8 Therefore in one day will these curses strike her – death, misery, and famine, and she will be utterly consumed by fire; for mighty is the Lord God who condemned her.’
REV 18:9 All the kings of the earth who had licentious intercourse with her and shared her luxury will weep and lament over her, when they see the smoke from the burning city,
REV 18:10 while they stand at a distance, horrified at her torture, and cry – ‘Alas! Alas! Great city! Mighty city of Babylon! In a single hour your judgment fell.’
REV 18:11 And the merchants of the earth weep and wail over her, because no longer does anyone buy their cargoes –
REV 18:12 their cargoes of gold, or silver, or precious stones, or pearls, or fine linen, or purple robes, or silk, or scarlet cloth; nor their many scented woods; nor their many articles of ivory; nor their many articles of choicest wood, or brass, or iron, or marble;
REV 18:13 nor their cinnamon, or spice, or incense, or perfumes, or frankincense, or wine, or oil, or fine flour, or wheat, or cattle, or sheep; nor their horses, or chariots, or slaves; nor the bodies and souls of people.
REV 18:14 The fruit that your soul craved is no longer within your reach, and all dainties and luxuries are lost to you, never to be found again.
REV 18:15 The merchants who sold these things, and grew rich by her, will stand at a distance weeping and wailing, horrified at her torture, and crying –
REV 18:16 ‘Alas! Alas! Great city! City clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet cloth! City adorned with gold ornaments, and precious stones, and pearls!
REV 18:17 In a single hour your vast wealth vanished.’ Every ship’s captain and all who sail to any port, and sailors, and all who get their living from the sea, stood at a distance,
REV 18:18 and seeing the smoke from the burning city, cried – ‘What city can compare with the Great city?’
REV 18:19 They threw dust on their heads, and, as they wept and wailed, they cried – ‘Alas! Alas! Great city! All who have ships on the sea grew rich through her magnificence. In a single hour it has vanished.’
REV 18:20 Rejoice over her, heaven, and people of Christ, and apostles, and prophets, for God has avenged you on her!
REV 18:21 Then a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and threw it into the sea, crying – ‘So will Babylon, the great city, be violently overthrown, never more to be seen.
REV 18:22 No more will the music of harpers, or minstrels, or flute players, or trumpeters be heard in you, no more will any worker, skilled in any art, be found in you; no more will the sound of a mill be heard in you;
REV 18:23 no more will the light of a lamp shine in you; no more will the voices of groom and bride be heard in you. Your merchants were the great men of the earth, for all the nations were deceived by your magical charms.’
REV 18:24 Yes, and in her was to be found the blood of the prophets and of Christ’s people, and of all who have been put to death on the earth.
REV 19:1 After this, I heard what seemed to be a great shout from a vast throng in heaven, crying – “Hallelujah! To our God belong salvation, and glory, and Power,
REV 19:2 for true and righteous are his judgments. For he has passed judgment on the infamous prostitute who was corrupting the earth by her licentiousness, and he has taken vengeance on her for the blood of his servants.”
REV 19:3 Again they cried – “Hallelujah!” And the smoke from her ruins rises for ever and ever.
REV 19:4 Then the twenty-four elders and the Four creatures prostrated themselves and worshiped God who was seated on the throne, crying – “Amen, Hallelujah!”;
REV 19:5 and from the throne there came a voice which said – “Praise our God all you who serve him, You who worship him, both high and low.”
REV 19:6 Then I heard what seemed to be the shout of a vast throng, like the sound of many waters, and like the sound of loud peals of thunder, crying – “Hallelujah! For the Lord is king, our God, the Almighty.
REV 19:7 Let us rejoice and exalt; and we will pay him honour, for the hour for the Marriage of the Lamb has come, and his Bride has made herself ready.
REV 19:8 And to her it has been granted to robe herself in fine linen, white and pure, for that linen is the good deeds of the people of Christ.”
REV 19:9 Then a voice said to me “Write – ‘Blessed are those who have been summoned to the marriage feast of the Lamb.’” And the voice said – “These words of God are true.”
REV 19:10 I prostrated myself at the feet of him who spoke to worship him, but he said to me – “No! I am your fellow servant, and the fellow servant of your brothers and sisters who bear their testimony to Jesus. Worship God. For to bear testimony to Jesus needs the inspiration of the prophets.”
REV 19:11 Then I saw that heaven lay open. There appears a white horse; its rider is called “Faithful” and “True”; righteously does he judge and make war.
REV 19:12 His eyes are flaming fires; on his head there are many diadems, and he bears a name, written, which no one knows but himself;
REV 19:13 he has been clothed in a garment sprinkled with blood; and the name by which he is called is “The Word of God.”
REV 19:14 The armies of heaven followed him, mounted on white horses and clothed in fine linen, white and pure.
REV 19:15 From his mouth comes a sharp sword, with which to smite the nations; and he will rule them with an iron rod. He treads the grapes in the press of the maddening wine of the wrath of Almighty God;
REV 19:16 and on his robe and on his thigh he has this name written – “KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.”
REV 19:17 Then I saw an angel standing on the sun. He cried in a loud voice to all the birds that fly in mid-heaven – “Gather and come to the great feast of God,
REV 19:18 to eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of commanders, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses and their riders, and the flesh of all free and enslaved, and of high and low.”
REV 19:19 Then I saw the Beast and the kings of the earth and their armies, gathered together to fight with him who sat on the horse and with his army.
REV 19:20 The Beast was captured, and with him was taken the false prophet, who performed the marvels before the eyes of the Beast, with which he deceived those who had received the brand of the Beast and those who worshiped his image. Alive, they were thrown, both of them, into the lake of fire – of burning sulphur.
REV 19:21 The rest were killed by the sword which came out of the mouth of him who rode on the horse; and all the birds fed on their flesh.
REV 20:1 Then I saw an angel coming down from heaven, with the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.
REV 20:2 He seized the Dragon, the primeval snake (who is the “devil” or “Satan”), and bound him in chains for a thousand years.
REV 20:3 He flung him into the bottomless pit and locked it, and set his seal on it; that he should not deceive the nations any more, until the thousand years were ended. After that he must be let loose for a while.
REV 20:4 Then I saw thrones, and to those who took their seats on them authority was given to act as judges. And I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded because of the testimony to Jesus and because of the message of God, for they had refused to worship the Beast or its image, and had not received the brand on their foreheads and on their hands. They were restored to life, and they reigned with the Christ for a thousand years.
REV 20:5 (The rest of the dead were not restored to life until the thousand years were ended.) This is the first resurrection.
REV 20:6 Blessed and holy will he be who shares in that first resurrection. The second Death has no power over them; but they will be priests of God, and the Christ, and they will reign with him for the thousand years.
REV 20:7 When the thousand years are ended, Satan will be let loose from his prison,
REV 20:8 and he will come out to deceive the nations that live in the four corners of the earth – Gog and Magog. He will come to gather them together for battle; and their number will be as great as the sand on the sea-shore.
REV 20:9 They went up over the breadth of the whole earth, and surrounded the camp of Christ’s people and the city that he loves. Then fire fell from the heavens and consumed them;
REV 20:10 and the devil, their deceiver, was hurled into the lake of fire and sulphur, where the Beast and the false prophet already were, and they will be tortured day and night for ever and ever.
REV 20:11 Then I saw a great white throne, and him who was seated on it. The earth and the heavens fled from his presence; no place was left for them.
REV 20:12 And I saw the dead, high and low, standing before the throne; and books were opened. Then another book was opened, the book of life; and the dead were judged, according to their actions, by what was written in the books.
REV 20:13 The sea gave up its dead, and Death and Hades gave up their dead; and they were judged, one by one, each according to his actions.
REV 20:14 Then Death and Hades were hurled into the lake of fire. This is the Second Death – the lake of fire;
REV 20:15 and all whose names were not found written in the book of life were hurled into the lake of fire.
REV 21:1 Then I saw new heavens and a new earth. The former heavens and the former earth had passed away; and the sea has ceased to be.
REV 21:2 And I saw the Holy City, Jerusalem, descending new out of heaven from God, like a bride adorned in readiness for her husband.
REV 21:3 And I heard a loud voice from the throne, which said – “See! The tent of God is set up among people. God will live among them, and they will be his Peoples, and God himself will be among them,
REV 21:4 and he will wipe away all tears from their eyes. There will be no more death, nor will there be any more grief or crying or pain. The old order has passed away.”
REV 21:5 And he who was seated on the throne said – “See, I make all things new!” And he said – “Write this, for these words may be trusted and are true.”
REV 21:6 And he said to me – “They are fulfilled. I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the End. To those who thirst I will give of the spring of the water of life, freely.
REV 21:7 Those who conquer will enter into possession of these things, and I will be their God, and they will be my children.
REV 21:8 But as for cowards, unbelievers, the degraded, murderers, the impure, sorcerers, idolaters, and all liars – their place will be in the burning lake of fire and sulphur. That is the Second Death.”
REV 21:9 Then one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls, and were laden with the seven last curses, came and spoke to me. “Come here,” he said, “and I will show you the Bride, the Wife of the Lamb.”
REV 21:10 He carried me away in a trance to a great high mountain, and showed me Jerusalem, the Holy City, descending out of heaven from God, filled with the glory of God.
REV 21:11 Its brilliance was like a precious stone, like a jasper, transparent as crystal.
REV 21:12 It had a great high wall, in which were twelve gates; and at these gates there were twelve angels, and there were names inscribed on the gates, the names of the twelve tribes of the Israelites.
REV 21:13 There were three gates on the east, three gates on the north, three gates on the south, and three gates on the west.
REV 21:14 The wall of the city had twelve foundation stones, on which were the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
REV 21:15 And the angel who was speaking to me had as a measure a gold rod, with which to measure the city and its gates and its wall.
REV 21:16 The city is square; the length and the breadth are the same. The angel measured with his rod; it was twelve hundred miles; its length, and breadth, and height are equal.
REV 21:17 Then he measured the wall; it was two hundred and eighty-eight feet, as people measure, that is as the angel measured.
REV 21:18 The material of the wall of the city was jasper, and the city was built of pure gold, which shone like clear glass.
REV 21:19 The foundations of the wall of the city were ornamented with every kind of precious stone. The first foundation stone was a jasper; the second a sapphire; the third a chalcedony; the fourth an emerald;
REV 21:20 the fifth a sardonyx; the sixth a carnelian; the seventh a chrysolite; the eighth a beryl; the ninth a topaz; the tenth a chrysoprase; the eleventh a hyacinth; and the twelfth an amethyst.
REV 21:21 The twelve gates were made of twelve pearls, each gate of one pearl. The street of the city was of pure gold, transparent as glass.
REV 21:22 And I saw no Temple there, for the Lord, our God, the Almighty, and the Lamb are its Temple.
REV 21:23 The city has no need of the sun or the moon to shine on it, for the glory of God illuminated it, and its Lamp was the Lamb.
REV 21:24 The nations walk by the light of it; and the kings of the earth bring their glory into it.
REV 21:25 Its gates will never be shut by day, and there will be no night there.
REV 21:26 And people will bring the glory and honour of the nations into it.
REV 21:27 Never will any unhallowed thing enter it, nor they whose life is shameful and false, but only those whose names have been written in the Lamb’s book of life.
REV 22:1 And the angel showed me a river of the water of life, as clear as crystal, issuing from the throne of God and of the Lamb,
REV 22:2 in the middle of the street of the city. On each side of the river was a Tree of life which bore twelve kinds of fruit, yielding its fruit each month; and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.
REV 22:3 Every thing that is accursed will cease to be. The throne of God and of the Lamb will be within it, and his servants will worship him;
REV 22:4 they will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads.
REV 22:5 Night will cease to be. They have no need of the light of a lamp, nor have they the light of the sun; for the Lord God will be their light, and they will reign for ever and ever.
REV 22:6 Then the angel said to me – ‘These words may be trusted and are true. The Lord, the God that inspires the prophets, sent his angel to show his servants what must quickly take place;
REV 22:7 and they said “I will come quickly.” Blessed will he be who lays to heart the words of the prophecy contained in this book.’
REV 22:8 It was I, John, who heard and saw these things; and, when I heard and saw them, I prostrated myself in worship at the feet of the angel that showed them to me.
REV 22:9 But he said to me – ‘Forbear; I am your fellow servant, and the fellow servant of your fellow prophets, and of all who lay to heart the words in this book. Worship God.’
REV 22:10 Then the angel said to me – ‘Do not keep secret the words of the prophecy contained in this book; for the time is near.
REV 22:11 Let the wrongdoer continue to do wrong; the filthy-minded continue to be filthy; the righteous continue to act righteously; and the holy-minded continue to be holy.’
REV 22:12 (“I will come quickly. I bring my rewards with me, to give to each what their actions deserve.
REV 22:13 I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the beginning and the End.”)
REV 22:14 Blessed will they be who wash their robes! They will have the right to approach the Tree of life, and may enter the city by the gates.
REV 22:15 Outside will be the filthy, the sorcerers, the impure, the murderers, the idolaters, and all who love the false and live it.
REV 22:16 “I, Jesus, sent my angel to bear testimony to you about these things before the churches. I am the Scion and the Offspring of David, the bright star of the Morning.”
REV 22:17 “Come,” say the Spirit and the Bride; and all who hear, say “Come.” All who thirst, come; anyone who wants, take the water of life freely.
REV 22:18 I declare to all who hear the words of the prophecy contained in this book – “If anyone adds to it, God will add to his troubles the curses described in this book;
REV 22:19 and if anyone takes away any of the words in the book containing this prophecy, God will take away his share in the Tree of life, and in the Holy City – as described in this book.”
REV 22:20 He whose testimony this is says – “Assuredly I will come quickly.” “Amen, come, Lord Jesus.”
REV 22:21 May the blessing of the Lord Jesus Christ, be with his people.
